
Movies and books  
One flew over the Cuckoo's Nest  
 
One flew over the Cuckoo's Nest (original title): 1975, USA 

Direction: Milos Forman

Scenario: Bo Goldman, Lawrence Hauben

Producer: Saul Zaentz, Michael Douglas 

Cinematography: Haskell Wexler, Bill Butler, William A Fraker

Music: Jack Nitzsche

Cast: Jack Nicholson, Louise Fletcher, William Redfield, Michael Berryman, Brad Dourif, Christopher Lloyd, Danny De Vito, Scatman Crothers, Dean R. Brooks


The film's unauthorized screenplay (by Lawrence Hauben and Bo Goldman) was restructured and adapted from author Ken Kesey's 1962 novel of the same name.

Plot overview 

The theme of the film is set in the world of an authentic mental hospital (Oregon State Hospital in Salem, Oregon). 

The title was derived from a familiar nursery rhyme called Vintery, Mintery, Cutery, Corn. The ones that fly east and west are diametrically opposed to each other and represent the two combatants in the film. The one that flies over the cuckoo's nest [the mental hospital filled with "cuckoo" patients] is the giant, "deaf-mute'" Chief Bromden.

Chief Bromden, the half-Indian narrator of One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest, has been a patient in an Oregon psychiatric hospital for ten years. His paranoia is evident from the first lines of the book, and he suffers from hallucinations and delusions. Bromden's worldview is dominated by his fear of what he calls the Combine, a huge conglomeration that controls society and forces people into conformity. Bromden pretends to be deaf and dumb and tries to go unnoticed, even though he is six feet seven inches tall. 

The mental patients, all male, are divided into Acutes, who can be cured, and Chronics, who cannot be cured. They are ruled by Nurse Ratched (Louise Fletcher), a former army nurse who runs the ward with harsh, mechanical precision. During daily Group Meetings, she encourages the Acutes to attack each other in their most vulnerable places, shaming them into submission. If a patient rebels, he is sent to receive electroshock treatments and sometimes a lobotomy, even though both practices have fallen out of favor with the medical community.

When Randle McMurphy (Jack Nicholson) arrives as a transfer from the Pendleton Work Farm, Bromden senses that something is different about him

At first, the confrontations between Ratched and McMurphy provide entertainment for the other patients. McMurphy's insubordination, however, soon stimulates the rest of them into rebellion. 

McMurphy's last bold victory overextends his reach, when he plans a pre-escape party with alcohol and prostitutes. 

The aides discover the mess the next morning, setting off a series of violent events. When Nurse Ratched finds Billy, another patient, with Candy (a prostitute), she threatens to tell Billy's mother. Billy becomes hysterical and commits suicide by cutting his throat. McMurphy attacks Ratched, ripping open the front of her dress and attempting to strangle her. In retaliation, she has him lobotomized, and he returns to the ward as a vegetable. However, Ratched has lost her tyrannical power over the ward. The patients transfer to other wards or check themselves out of the hospital. Bromden suffocates McMurphy in his bed, enabling him to die with some dignity rather than live as a symbol of Ratched's power. 

Bromden, having recovered the immense strength that he had believed lost during his time in the mental ward, escapes from the hospital by breaking through a window.

Psychiatry in the sixties 

 

The movie shows a dramatic picture on how life was in psychiatric institutions in the sixties. Although the movie can certainly not be considered as a documentary on how life was in a psychiatric institution 40 years ago, it nevertheless reminds us how dramatically the treatment of people with mental disorders has improved. 

With the arrival of better diagnostic techniques and better medicines, such as the introduction of atypical antipsychotics, patients with schizophrenia are no longer kept in a psychiatric institution for years and years. They are actually staying in hospitals when experiencing a relapse of their condition and, after having been stabilized with proper medication and therapy, sent back to society as soon as possible.

We can also not imagine that drastic procedures such as lobotomy were used routinely in some psychiatric hospitals in the sixties.

Commentary 

The mid-70s baby-boomers' counter-culture was ripe for a film dramatizing rebellion and insubordination against oppressive bureaucracy and characterized by an insistence upon rights, self-expression, and freedom. 

Milos Forman's drama crowned with 5 Oscars convinces through an intelligent script and a very intense Jack Nicholson.
