DRUG TREATMENT





DRUG TREATMENT

Acute Management of Psychosis in Primary Care

In general, antipsychotics used in schizophrenia and related 
psychoses should be initiated
in secondary care, or as a result of advice from a psychiatrist. 
If acute sedation is
necessary in primary care, then diazepam should be used. The 
initiation of an
antipsychotic prior to referral should be avoided due to the 
possibility of masking
symptoms, thus making diagnosis difficult.
Test for possible co-existing medical conditions which may be 
causing symptoms and
any evidence of substance misuse (U&Es, FBC, LFTs, TFT, urine 
drug screen).

Initiation and Monitoring of Antipsychotics in Primary Care

In general, antipsychotic treatment will be initiated in 
specialist secondary care by an
experienced psychiatrist. There will however be some patients 
who choose not to
engage with the specialist service in secondary care. Initiation 
for these patients may
be by their GP, and this should be done in consultation with the 
appropriate
consultant and with the CPA key worker/care manager.
Patients started on an antipsychotic should be re-assessed by 
the practitioner who
initiated treatment, or another member of the multidisciplinary 
team, at 2-4 weeks and
at 6-8 weeks to monitor efficacy and side effects.

Doses and Polypharmacy

Antipsychotic efficacy may take many weeks to begin, so it is 
important to avoid
excessive dosing whilst waiting for this onset. If sedation is 
required then short term
benzodiazepines can be used.
In general it should be possible to achieve control of psychotic 
symptoms using a
single antipsychotic drug.

Monitoring of Adverse Effects

The side effect profile will depend on the type of drug used. 
The relative side effects
are listed in Appendix 1.
If adverse effects are suspected during routine clinical
monitoring appropriate tests should be considered (including BP, 
pulse, U&Es, FBC,
LFTs, AND serum prolactin as a minimum). ECG and EEG may also be 
helpful.
All drugs should be stopped if 
neuroleptic malignant syndrome is 
suspected (see
over), or the neutrophil count falls below 1.5.
Weight gain is often reason for non-compliance and should be 
monitored. There is no
available accurate data comparing weight gain with different 
antipsychotics, but there
is a growing view that this is more of a problem with the 
atypicals. Most weight is
gained during the first 12-16 weeks of therapy, and the 
mechanism is unclear.
Women seem to be more affected than men (Bazire, S., 
Psychotropic Drug Directory,
2000).

Drug Interactions

Smoking may decrease plasma levels of some antipsychotic drugs. 
An increase in
plasma levels, and associated adverse effects, may occur in 
patients stopping
smoking.
Consult the BNF or product SPC for detailed information about 
drug interactions of
specific drugs.

Repeat Prescribing

There will be some patients who adhere to their treatment better 
if medication is
prescribed by their GP. In the interests of promoting good 
adherence the psychiatrist
may ask the GP to become more involved in the management of the 
patient, and
undertake routine repeat prescribing within a shared care 
arrangement. In these
circumstances clear agreement as to who is prescribing, and 
when, is required.
The GP should at all times be provided with a copy of the latest 
care plan. The
psychiatrist should continue to prescribe until shared care 
arrangements have been
agreed with the patient’s GP.
A guide to shared care protocols is attached at Appendix 2

Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome

(Taken from The Maudsley Prescribing Guidelines 6th
edition, 2001)
There is an incidence of 0.5-1%, with a mortality of 20% if 
untreated. Onset may be
acute or insidious, and the course may fluctuate.

Signs and symptoms are

• Intense diaphoresis

• Fever/ hyperthermia

• Hypertension/ autonomic 
instability (fluctuating BP)

• Tachycardia

• Incontinence/ retention/ 
obstruction

• Muscular rigidity (may be 
confined to head and neck)

• Confusion/ agitation/ 
altered consciousness

• Raised creatinine 
phosphokinase > 1000 IU/L (controversial)

• Leukocytosis

Risk factors

• Organic brain disease: 
alcoholism, dementia

• Hypermetabolic states: 
hyperthyroidism

• Psychiatric diagnosis

• Parkinson’s disease

• Agitation

• Dehydration

• History of catatonia

• High dose of antipsychotic

• Recent dose increase

Precipitating factors

• Antipsychotics: typical and 
atypical

• Rapidity of titration and 
dose of drug

• Antipsychotic withdrawal

• Antidepressants: including 
SSRI’s

• Abrupt cessation of 
dopamine agonists

• Other drugs: tetrabenazine

• Drugs of abuse: cocaine, 
MDMA, amphetamine

Treatment

Withdraw antipsychotic immediately. Refer as a medical 
emergency.

Complications

Renal, cardiovascular, respiratory and hepatic complications can 
occur.








var sc_project=585393; 
var sc_partition=4; 
var sc_security="8832a018"; 
var sc_invisible=1; 


 







