Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 

1997 Chapter 43 - continued 


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

An Act to make further provision with respect to the treatment of offenders; and for connected purposes. 

[21st March 1997] 

BE IT ENACTED by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:- 
  

PART I 

MANDATORY AND MINIMUM CUSTODIAL SENTENCES 

Conditions relating to mandatory and minimum custodial sentences. 

    1. - (1) This section has effect for the purposes of setting out the basis on which the court shall carry out its sentencing functions under this Part. 
  

    (2) Under section 2 below, when determining whether it would be appropriate not to impose a life sentence the court shall have regard to the circumstances relating to either of the offences or to the offender. 
  

    (3) Under sections 3 and 4 below, when determining whether it would be appropriate not to impose a custodial sentence of at least seven years under section 3(2) or, as the case may be, of at least three years under section 4(2) the court shall have regard to the specific circumstances which- 
  

(a) relate to any of the offences or to the offender; and 
(b) would make the prescribed custodial sentence unjust in all the circumstances. 
Mandatory life sentence for second serious offence. 

    2. - (1) This section applies where- 
  

(a) a person is convicted of a serious offence committed after the commencement of this section; and 
(b) at the time when that offence was committed, he was 18 or over and had been convicted in any part of the United Kingdom of another serious offence. 
    (2) The court shall impose a life sentence, that is to say- 
  

(a) where the person is 21 or over, a sentence of imprisonment for life; 
(b) where he is under 21, a sentence of custody for life under section 8(2) of the Criminal Justice Act 1982 ("the 1982 Act"), 
unless the court is of the opinion that there are exceptional circumstances relating to either of the offences or to the offender which justify its not doing so. 
  

    (3) Where the court does not impose a life sentence, it shall state in open court that it is of that opinion and what the exceptional circumstances are. 
  

    (4) An offence the sentence for which is imposed under subsection (2) above shall not be regarded as an offence the sentence for which is fixed by law. 
  

    (5) An offence committed in England and Wales is a serious offence for the purposes of this section if it is any of the following, namely- 
  

(a) an attempt to commit murder, a conspiracy to commit murder or an incitement to murder; 
(b) an offence under section 4 of the Offences Against the Person Act 1861 (soliciting murder); 
(c) manslaughter; 
(d) an offence under section 18 of the Offences Against the Person Act 1861 (wounding, or causing grievous bodily harm, with intent); 
(e) rape or an attempt to commit rape; 
(f) an offence under section 5 of the Sexual Offences Act 1956 (intercourse with a girl under 13); 
(g) an offence under section 16 (possession of a firearm with intent to injure), section 17 (use of a firearm to resist arrest) or section 18 (carrying a firearm with criminal intent) of the Firearms Act 1968; and 
(h) robbery where, at some time during the commission of the offence, the offender had in his possession a firearm or imitation firearm within the meaning of that Act. 
    (6) An offence committed in Scotland is a serious offence for the purposes of this section if the conviction for it was obtained on indictment in the High Court of Justiciary and it is any of the following, namely- 
  

(a) culpable homicide; 
(b) attempted murder, incitement to commit murder or conspiracy to commit murder; 
(c) rape or attempted rape; 
(d) clandestine injury to women or an attempt to cause such injury; 
(e) sodomy, or an attempt to commit sodomy, where the complainer, that is to say, the person against whom the offence was committed, did not consent; 
(f) assault where the assault- 
(i) is aggravated because it was carried out to the victim's severe injury or the danger of the victim's life; or 
(ii) was carried out with an intention to rape or to ravish the victim; 
(g) robbery where, at some time during the commission of the offence, the offender had in his possession a firearm or imitation firearm within the meaning of the Firearms Act 1968; 
(h) an offence under section 16 (possession of a firearm with intent to injure), section 17 (use of a firearm to resist arrest) or section 18 (carrying a firearm with criminal intent) of that Act; 
(i) lewd, libidinous or indecent behaviour or practices; and 
(j) an offence under section 5(1) of the Criminal Law (Consolidation) (Scotland) Act 1995 (unlawful intercourse with a girl under 13). 
    (7) An offence committed in Northern Ireland is a serious offence for the purposes of this section if it is any of the following, namely- 
  

(a) an offence falling within any of paragraphs (a) to (e) of subsection (5) above; 
(b) an offence under section 4 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act 1885 (intercourse with a girl under 14); 
(c) an offence under Article 17 (possession of a firearm with intent to injure), Article 18(1) (use of a firearm to resist arrest) or Article 19 (carrying a firearm with criminal intent) of the Firearms (Northern Ireland) Order 1981; and 
(d) robbery where, at some time during the commission of the offence, the offender had in his possession a firearm or imitation firearm within the meaning of that Order. 
Minimum of seven years for third class A drug trafficking offence. 

    3. - (1) This section applies where- 
  

(a) a person is convicted of a class A drug trafficking offence committed after the commencement of this section; 
(b) at the time when that offence was committed, he was 18 or over and had been convicted in any part of the United Kingdom of two other class A drug trafficking offences; and 
(c) one of those other offences was committed after he had been convicted of the other. 
    (2) The court shall impose a custodial sentence for a term of at least seven years except where the court is of the opinion that there are specific circumstances which- 
  

(a) relate to any of the offences or to the offender; and 
(b) would make the prescribed custodial sentence unjust in all the circumstances. 
    (3) Where the court does not impose such a sentence, it shall state in open court that it is of that opinion and what the specific circumstances are. 
  

    (4) Where- 
  

(a) a person is charged with a class A drug trafficking offence (which, apart from this subsection, would be triable either way); and 
(b) the circumstances are such that, if he were convicted of the offence, he could be sentenced for it under subsection (2) above, 
the offence shall be triable only on indictment. 
  

    (5) In this section "class A drug trafficking offence" means a drug trafficking offence committed in respect of a class A drug; and for this purpose- 
  

"class A drug" has the same meaning as in the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971; 
"drug trafficking offence" means a drug trafficking offence within the meaning of the Drug Trafficking Act 1994, the Proceeds of Crime (Scotland) Act 1995 or the Proceeds of Crime (Northern Ireland) Order 1996. 
    (6) In this section and section 4 below "custodial sentence" means- 
  

(a) in relation to a person who is 21 or over, a sentence of imprisonment; 
(b) in relation to a person who is under 21, a sentence of detention in a young offender institution. 
Minimum of three years for third domestic burglary. 

    4. - (1) This section applies where- 
  

(a) a person is convicted of a domestic burglary committed after the commencement of this section; 
(b) at the time when that burglary was committed, he was 18 or over and had been convicted in England and Wales of two other domestic burglaries; and 
(c) one of those other burglaries was committed after he had been convicted of the other, and both of them were committed after the commencement of this section. 
    (2) The court shall impose a custodial sentence for a term of at least three years except where the court is of the opinion that there are specific circumstances which- 
  

(a) relate to any of the offences or to the offender; and 
(b) would make the prescribed custodial sentence unjust in all the circumstances. 
    (3) Where the court does not impose such a sentence, it shall state in open court that it is of that opinion and what the specific circumstances are. 
  

    (4) Where- 
  

(a) a person is charged with a domestic burglary which, apart from this subsection, would be triable either way; and 
(b) the circumstances are such that, if he were convicted of the burglary, he could be sentenced for it under subsection (2) above, 
the burglary shall be triable only on indictment. 
  

    (5) In this section "domestic burglary" means a burglary committed in respect of a building or part of a building which is a dwelling. 
  

Appeals where previous convictions set aside. 

    5. - ... 

Certificates of convictions for purposes of Part I. 

    6. - ... 

Offences under service law. 

    7. - (1) Where- 
  

(a) a person has at any time been convicted of an offence under section 70 of the Army Act 1955 or the Air Force Act 1955 or section 42 of the Naval Discipline Act 1957; and 
(b) the corresponding civil offence (within the meaning of that Act) was a serious offence, a class A drug trafficking offence or a domestic burglary, 
the relevant section shall have effect as if he had at that time been convicted in England and Wales of the corresponding civil offence. 
  

    (2) Subsection (3) of section 6 above applies for the purposes of this section as it applies for the purposes of that section. 
  

PART II 

EFFECT OF CUSTODIAL SENTENCES 

CHAPTER I 

DETERMINATE SENTENCES 


General 

Time to be served. 

    8. - (1) Subject to the following provisions of this Chapter, a prisoner shall be released when he has served his sentence. 
  

    (2) In this Chapter "prisoner" means any person who is sentenced to imprisonment for a term in respect of an offence committed after the commencement of this Chapter. 
  

Crediting of periods of remand in custody. 

    9. - ... 


Early release 

Early release on compassionate grounds. 

    10. - (1) The Secretary of State may at any time release a prisoner if he is satisfied that exceptional circumstances exist which justify the prisoner's release on compassionate grounds. 
  

    (2) Before releasing under subsection (1) above a prisoner who is serving a sentence of imprisonment for a term of three years or more, the Secretary of State shall consult the Parole Board, unless the circumstances are such as to render such consultation impracticable. 
  

Award of early release days for good behaviour. 

    11. - (1) This section applies where a prisoner is serving a sentence of imprisonment for a term of more than two months and less than three years. 
  

    (2) For each initial assessment period, the prescribed person may award the prisoner such number of early release days, not exceeding twelve, as he may determine having regard to the extent to which the prisoner's behaviour during the period has attained the prescribed minimum standard. 
  

    (3) For each subsequent assessment period, the prescribed person may award the prisoner- 
  

(a) such number of early release days, not exceeding six, as he may determine having regard to the extent to which the prisoner's behaviour during the period has attained the prescribed minimum standard; and 
(b) such number of such days, not exceeding six, as he may determine having regard to the extent to which the prisoner's behaviour during the period has exceeded that standard. 
    (4) Where at any time this section applies in place of section 12, 28 or 29 below because a sentence is set aside or varied on appeal, then, for each assessment period for the purposes of this section beginning before that time, the prescribed person shall assume, for the purposes of subsection (2) or (3) above, that the prisoner's behaviour was such as to entitle him to the maximum number of early release days available under that subsection. 
  

    (5) Where any early release days are awarded to a prisoner, any period which he must serve before becoming entitled to be released shall be reduced by the aggregate of those days; but nothing in this subsection shall entitle a prisoner to be released on the basis of an award before the day after that on which the award is made. 
  

    (6) Prison rules may- 
  

(a) require determinations under this section to be made at prescribed times, and to be notified to the prisoners concerned in the prescribed manner; and 
(b) make provision for enabling prisoners to appeal against such determinations to prescribed persons. 
    (7) The Secretary of State may by order provide that subsections (2) and (3) above shall have effect subject to such amendments as may be specified in the order; but no amendment so specified shall reduce- 
  

(a) the number of days specified in subsection (2) or (3)(a); or 
(b) the total number of days specified in subsection (3). 
    (8) The power to make an order under this section shall be exercisable by statutory instrument which shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament. 
  

    (9) In this section, in relation to a prisoner- 
  

"assessment period" means- 
(a) the period of two months beginning with the day on which he was sentenced; and 
(b) each successive period of two months ending before his release; 
"initial assessment period" means an assessment period beginning less than twelve months after the day on which he was sentenced and "subsequent assessment period" shall be construed accordingly. 
Early release on Parole Board recommendation. 

    12. - (1) This section applies where a prisoner is serving a sentence of imprisonment for a term of three years or more. 
  

    (2) As soon as the prisoner has served five-sixths of his sentence, the Secretary of State shall, if recommended to do so by the Parole Board, release him. 
  

Provisional early release days for remand prisoners. 

    13. - (1) This section applies where an accused is remanded in custody in connection with one or more offences- 
  

(a) which are alleged to have been committed after the commencement of this Chapter; and 
(b) in respect of which he would be liable, if convicted, to a life sentence or to imprisonment for a term of more than two months. 
    (2) For the purpose of enabling early release days to be awarded on a provisional basis, subsections (2) and (3) of section 11 above shall have effect as if- 
  

(a) the accused had been convicted of, or of an offence related to, the offence or any of the offences, and had been sentenced to imprisonment for a term of more than two months and less than three years, on the day on which he was remanded in custody; 
(b) any days falling after that day for which he is not remanded in custody were disregarded; and 
(c) references in that section to periods of two months were references to periods of 60 days. 
    (3) Subsections (4) to (6) below shall apply if, and only if, each of the following conditions is fulfilled, namely- 
  

(a) the accused is convicted of, or of an offence related to, the offence or any of the offences; 
(b) he is sentenced to imprisonment for a term of more than two months and less than three years; and 
(c) a direction is given under section 9 above. 
    (4) For the purposes of section 11(5) above, any early release days provisionally awarded under subsection (2) above shall be treated as early release days awarded on the day on which the direction under section 9 above is given. 
  

    (5) For the purpose of securing that any days for which the accused was remanded in custody are taken into account in determining assessment periods for the purposes of section 11 above, that section shall have effect as if- 
  

(a) the accused had been convicted and sentenced on the day on which he was remanded in custody; 
(b) any days which fell before the day on which he was sentenced, and for which he was not remanded in custody, were disregarded; and 
(c) references to periods of two months, in their application to periods beginning before that day, were references to periods of 60 days. 
    (6) If the direction under section 9 above is given in relation to a number of days less than that for which the accused was remanded in custody- 
  

(a) subsection (4) above shall have effect as if the reference to any early release days provisionally awarded under subsection (2) above were a reference to the appropriate proportion of those days (rounded up to the nearest whole day); and 
(b) subsection (5) above shall have effect as if the reference to days for which he was not remanded in custody included a reference to the complementary proportion of the days for which he was so remanded (rounded down to the nearest whole day). 
    (7) Where for any period the accused has been held in police detention, the prescribed person shall assume, for the purposes of section 11(2) and (3) above as modified by subsection (2) above, that during that period- 
  

(a) the prisoner had been in prison; and 
(b) his behaviour had attained, but not exceeded, the prescribed minimum standard for the purposes of that section. 
    (8) In this section- 
  

"the appropriate proportion" means the proportion which the number of days in relation to which the direction under section 9 above is given bears to the number of days for which the accused was remanded in custody, and "the complementary proportion" shall be construed accordingly; 
"life sentence" has the same meaning as in section 34 below; 
"related", in relation to an offence, has the same meaning as in section 9 above; 
and subsections (2), (9) and (10) of section 9 above shall apply for the purposes of this section as they apply for the purposes of that section. 
  


Additional days 

Award of additional days for disciplinary offences. 

    14. - (1) Prison rules may include provision for the award of additional days to prisoners who are guilty of disciplinary offences. 
  

    (2) Subject to subsection (3) below, where any additional days are awarded to a prisoner, and are not remitted in accordance with prison rules, any period which he must serve before becoming- 
  

(a) entitled to be released under section 11 above; or 
(b) eligible to be released under section 12 above, 
shall be extended by the aggregate of those days. 
  

    (3) Nothing in subsection (2) above shall have the effect of extending any such period beyond the end of the prisoner's sentence, taking into account for this purpose any days directed by the court to count as time served as part of that sentence. 
  

Provisional additional days for remand prisoners. 

    15. - (1) This section applies where an accused is remanded in custody in connection with one or more offences- 
  

(a) which are alleged to have been committed after the commencement of this Chapter; and 
(b) in respect of which he would be liable, if convicted, to a life sentence or to imprisonment for a term of more than two months. 
    (2) For the purpose of enabling additional days to be awarded on a provisional basis, prison rules made by virtue of section 14(1) above shall have effect as if the accused- 
  

(a) had been convicted of, or of an offence related to, the offence or any of the offences; and 
(b) had been sentenced to imprisonment for a term of more than two months, on the day on which he was remanded in custody. 
    (3) Subsections (4) and (5) below shall apply if, and only if, each of the following conditions is fulfilled, namely- 
  

(a) the accused is convicted of, or of an offence related to, the offence or any of the offences; 
(b) he is sentenced to imprisonment for a term of more than two months; and 
(c) a direction is given under section 9 above. 
    (4) For the purposes of section 14(2) and (3) above, any additional days provisionally awarded under subsection (2) above shall be treated as additional days awarded on the day on which the direction under section 9 above is given. 
  

    (5) If the direction under section 9 above is given in relation to a number of days less than that for which the accused was remanded in custody, subsection (4) above shall have effect as if the reference to any additional days provisionally awarded under subsection (2) above were a reference to the appropriate proportion of those days (rounded up to the nearest whole day). 
  

    (6) In this section- 
  

"the appropriate proportion" has the same meaning as in section 13 above; 
"life sentence" has the same meaning as in section 34 below; 
"related", in relation to an offence, has the same meaning as in section 9 above; 
and subsections (2), (9) and (10) of section 9 above shall apply for the purposes of this section as they apply for the purposes of that section. 
  


Supervision after release 

Release supervision orders. 

    16. - (1) This section applies where- 
  

(a) an offender who has been sentenced to imprisonment for a term of twelve months or more in respect of an offence committed after the commencement of this Chapter is released otherwise than under section 10 above; 
(b) an offender who has been so sentenced is released under that section; or 
(c) an offender who has been sentenced to imprisonment for a term of less than twelve months in respect of an offence committed after that commencement is released under that section. 
    (2) On his release, the offender shall be subject to a release supervision order- 
  

(a) in a case falling within subsection (1)(a) above, for a period equal to 25 per cent of his term of imprisonment (rounded up to the nearest whole day) or a period of three months, whichever is the greater; 
(b) in a case falling within subsection (1)(b) above, for a period equal to the aggregate of the period mentioned in paragraph (a) above and the period mentioned in paragraph (c) below; 
(c) in a case falling within subsection (1)(c) above, for a period equal to so much of the remainder of his term as he would have been liable to serve but for his release under section 10 above; 
and in applying paragraphs (b) and (c) above account shall be taken of any early release or additional days awarded to the offender before his release. 
  

    (3) The release supervision order, which shall be made by the Secretary of State, shall provide that, throughout the period for which the order is in force ("the release supervision period"), the offender, so long as he is at large- 
  

(a) shall be under the supervision of a probation officer; and 
(b) shall comply with such conditions as are for the time being specified in the order. 
    (4) The Secretary of State- 
  

(a) shall not specify any condition which- 
(i) requires the offender to live in an approved probation hostel; or 
(ii) makes such provision as is made by a curfew order, 
except in accordance with recommendations of the Parole Board made after an oral hearing at which the offender had the opportunity to be heard or represented; and 
(b) in the case of an offender who has been sentenced to imprisonment for a term of three years or more, shall not specify any other condition except in accordance with recommendations of that Board. 
    (5) The Secretary of State may make rules for regulating the supervision under this section of any description of offenders. 
  

    (6) The power to make rules under this section shall be exercisable by statutory instrument which shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament. 
  

    (7) In this section- 
  

"approved probation hostel" has the same meaning as in the Probation Service Act 1993; 
"curfew order" has the same meaning as in the Criminal Justice Act 1991 ("the 1991 Act"). 
Breach of conditions of release supervision order. 

    17. - (1) If any offender in respect of whom a release supervision order is in force fails without reasonable excuse to comply with any of the conditions of the order, he shall be liable- 
  

(a) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding the relevant period or a fine or both; 
(b) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding the relevant period or a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale or both. 
    (2) An offence under subsection (1) above shall not be triable on indictment unless- 
  

(a) the relevant period would be longer than six months; or 
(b) the act or omission in question constitutes another offence which is punishable with imprisonment and is triable on indictment. 
    (3) A magistrates' court by which an offender is convicted of an offence under subsection (1) above which could have been tried on indictment may commit him in custody or on bail to the Crown Court for sentence; and the Crown Court to which he has been so committed may impose on him such a sentence as is mentioned in subsection (1)(a) above. 
  

    (4) A court shall not impose a sentence of imprisonment under subsection (1) above unless- 
  

(a) it considers it expedient to do so in the interests of protecting the public from serious harm from the offender; or 
(b) the offender's failure to comply with the condition in question consisted of the commission of an offence punishable with imprisonment. 
    (5) Nothing in section 1 or 2 of the 1991 Act shall apply in relation to such a sentence; and nothing in section 6 of that Act shall prevent a court from dealing with the offender in respect of an offence under subsection (1) above in any one of the following ways, namely- 
  

(a) where the offender is 16 or over- 
(i) by making a community service order, probation order or combination order in respect of him; or 
(ii) by making a curfew order in respect of him; or 
(iii) by doing both of those things; 
(b) where the offender is under 18- 
(i) by making a supervision order in respect of him; or 
(ii) by making both such an order and a curfew order in respect of him; and 
(c) where the case is one to which section 17 of the 1982 Act applies- 
(i) by making an order under that section requiring the offender to attend at an attendance centre; or 
(ii) by making both such an order and a curfew order in respect of him. 
    (6) In this section- 
  

"combination order" and "curfew order" have the same meanings as in the 1991 Act; 
"community service order" and "probation order" have the same meanings as in the 1973 Act; 
"supervision order" means a supervision order under the Children and Young Persons Act 1969 ("the 1969 Act"); 
"the relevant period" means- 
(a) on conviction on indictment, so much of the release supervision period as falls after the day on which the offender failed to comply with the condition; 
(b) on summary conviction, so much of that period as so falls or six months, whichever is the shorter. 
Powers of arrest and search warrants. 

    18. - ...


Special cases 

Young offenders. 

    19. - (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, this Chapter applies to- 
  

(a) a sentence of detention in a young offender institution; and 
(b) a determinate sentence of detention under section 53 of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 ("the 1933 Act"), 
as it applies to an equivalent sentence of imprisonment. 
  

    (2) References in this Chapter to prisoners, or to prison or imprisonment, shall be construed in accordance with subsection (1) above. 
  

    (3) Section 9 above applies to periods of detention which offenders are liable to serve under secure training orders as it applies to sentences of imprisonment; and sections 9, 13 and 15 above apply to persons- 
  

(a) remanded or committed to local authority accommodation under section 23 of the 1969 Act or section 37 of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 ("the 1980 Act"); and 
(b) placed and kept in secure accommodation, 
as they apply to persons remanded in or committed to custody by an order of a court. 
  

    (4) For each assessment period for the purposes of section 11 above during the whole or part of which the prisoner- 
  

(a) is under 16; or 
(b) is detained in local authority accommodation, or a home provided by the Secretary of State under section 82(5) of the Children Act 1989, 
the prescribed person shall assume, for the purposes of subsection (2) or (3) of that section, that the prisoner's behaviour had been such as to entitle him to the maximum number of early release days available under that subsection. 
  

    (5) For each assessment period for the purposes of section 13 above during the whole or part of which the accused- 
  

(a) is under 16; or 
(b) is a person to whom section 9 applies by virtue of subsection (3) above, 
the prescribed person shall assume, for the purposes of subsection (2) or (3) of section 11 above as modified by section 13(2) above, that the accused's behaviour had been such as to entitle him to the maximum number of early release days available under that subsection. 
  

    (6) In relation to a released offender who is under 22, section 16 above shall have effect as if- 
  

(a) in subsection (1), paragraph (c) and, in paragraph (a), the words "of twelve months or more" were omitted; and 
(b) in subsection (3)(a), the reference to supervision by a probation officer included a reference to supervision by a social worker of a local authority social services department. 
    (7) Where a released offender who is under 18 and whose sentence was a determinate sentence of detention under section 53 of the 1933 Act commits an offence under section 17 above, the court may deal with him as if subsection (3) of section 53 applied; but no sentence of detention imposed by virtue of this subsection shall be for a term exceeding the relevant period within the meaning of section 17 above. 
  

    (8) In relation to a released offender who is under 22 and whose sentence- 
  

(a) was a sentence of detention in a young offender institution, or a sentence of detention under section 53 of the 1933 Act, for a term of less than 12 months; and 
(b) was not imposed in respect of a sexual offence committed after the commencement of this Chapter, 
section 17 above shall have effect as if the relevant period for the purposes of that section were a period of 30 days. 
  

    (9) Where an offender is released from a sentence of detention imposed under section 17 above as modified by subsection (8) above, he shall not be liable to a release supervision order in consequence of his conviction under that section. 
  

    (10) In this section "secure accommodation" has the same meaning as in section 23 of the 1969 Act, and- 
  

(a) any reference to a sentence of detention in a young offender institution includes a reference to a sentence under a custodial order within the meaning of section 71AA of the Army Act 1955 or the Air Force Act 1955 or section 43AA of the Naval Discipline Act 1957; and 
(b) any reference (however expressed) to a determinate sentence of detention under section 53 of the 1933 Act includes a reference to a sentence of detention under subsection (4) of section 71A of the Army Act 1955 or the Air Force Act 1955 or section 43A of the Naval Discipline Act 1957. 
Sexual offenders. 

    20. - (1) Subsection (2) below applies where- 
  

(a) there is released under this Chapter an offender who has been sentenced to imprisonment for a term in respect of a sexual offence committed after the commencement of this Chapter; and 
(b) the court by which he was so sentenced gave a direction under subsection (3) below. 
    (2) Section 16 above shall have effect in relation to the offender as if- 
  

(a) in subsection (1), paragraph (c) and, in paragraph (a), the words "of twelve months or more" were omitted; and 
(b) for subsection (2) there were substituted the following subsection- 
    "(2) On his release, the offender shall be subject to a release supervision order- 
  

(a) where he is released otherwise than under section 10 above, for such period as is specified in the direction under section 20(3) below; 
(b) where he is released under section 10 above, for a period equal to the aggregate of- 
(i) the period mentioned in paragraph (a) above; and 
(ii) a period equal to so much of the remainder of his term as he would have been liable to serve but for his release under section 10 above; 
and in applying paragraph (b) above account shall be taken of any early release or additional days awarded to the offender before his release." 
    (3) Where a court sentences an offender to imprisonment for a term in respect of a sexual offence committed after the commencement of this Chapter, it shall give a direction under this subsection unless it is of the opinion that there are exceptional circumstances which justify its not doing so. 
  

    (4) Where the court does not give a direction under subsection (3) above, it shall state in open court that it is of that opinion and what the exceptional circumstances are. 
  

    (5) A direction under subsection (3) above shall direct that the offender's release supervision period shall be such period as is specified in the direction. 
  

    (6) The period so specified shall be- 
  

(a) a period equal to 50 per cent of the offender's term of imprisonment (rounded up to the nearest whole day) or a period of twelve months, whichever is the longer; or 
(b) if the court considers a longer period necessary for the purpose of preventing the commission by the offender of further offences and of securing his rehabilitation, such longer period, not exceeding ten years, as it may determine. 
Violent offenders. 

    21. - (1) Subsection (2) below applies where- 
  

(a) there is released under this Chapter an offender who has been sentenced to imprisonment for a term of three years or more in respect of a violent offence committed after the commencement of this Chapter; and 
(b) the court by which he was so sentenced gave a direction under subsection (3) below. 
    (2) Section 16 above shall have effect in relation to the offender as if for subsection (2) there were substituted the following subsection- 
  

    "(2) On his release, the offender shall be subject to a release supervision order- 
  

(a) where he is released otherwise than under section 10 above, for such period as is specified in the direction under section 21(3) below; 
(b) where he is released under section 10 above, for a period equal to the aggregate of- 
(i) the period mentioned in paragraph (a) above; and 
(ii) a period equal to so much of the remainder of his term as he would have been liable to serve but for his release under section 10 above." 
    (3) Where a court sentences an offender to imprisonment for a term of three years or more in respect of a violent offence committed after the commencement of this Chapter, it may give a direction under this subsection if it considers a longer release supervision period necessary for the purpose of preventing the commission by the offender of further offences and of securing his rehabilitation. 
  

    (4) A direction under subsection (3) above shall direct that the offender's release supervision period shall be such period, not more than 50 per cent of the offender's term of imprisonment, as is specified in the direction. 
  

    (5) In this section "violent offence" has the same meaning as in Part I of the 1991 Act. 
  

Mentally disordered offenders. 

    22. - (1) Subject to subsection (3) below, sections 9 and 13 above apply to persons- 
  

(a) remanded to hospital under section 35 or 36 (remands to hospital) of the Mental Health Act 1983 ("the 1983 Act"); 
(b) admitted to hospital under section 38 of that Act (interim hospital orders); or 
(c) removed to hospital under section 48 of that Act (removal to hospital), 
as they apply to persons remanded in or committed to custody by an order of a court. 
  

    (2) In the case of a prisoner who for any period is detained in a hospital under section 45A of the 1983 Act (power of courts to direct hospital admission), or under section 47 (removal of prisoners to hospital) and section 49 (restriction on discharge of prisoners removed to hospital) of that Act- 
  

(a) section 11 above shall apply as if references to the prescribed person in subsections (2) and (3) were references to the Secretary of State and subsection (6) were omitted; and 
(b) the Secretary of State shall assume, for the purposes of subsection (2) or (3) of that section as so modified, that during that period- 
(i) the prisoner had been in prison; and 
(ii) his behaviour had been such as to entitle him to the maximum number of early release days available under that subsection. 
    (3) In the case of an accused who for any period is a person to whom section 13 above applies by virtue of subsection (1) above- 
  

(a) that section shall apply as if references to the prescribed person in section 11(2) and (3) above as modified by section 13(2) above were references to the Secretary of State; and 
(b) the Secretary of State shall assume, for the purposes of section 11(2) or (3) above as modified by section 13(2) above, that during that period- 
(i) the accused had been in prison; and 
(ii) his behaviour had been such as to entitle him to the maximum number of early release days available under that subsection. 
    (4) Where, immediately before the expiration of his sentence, a prisoner is detained in a hospital under section 45A of the 1983 Act, or under section 47 and 49 of that Act, section 16 above shall have effect as if- 
  

(a) the prisoner had been released on the expiration of his sentence; 
(b) the reference in subsection (3)(a) to supervision by a probation officer included a reference to supervision by a social worker of a local authority social services department; 
(c) the reference in subsection (4)(a) to an approved probation hostel included a reference to any hostel or home whose residents are subject to supervision; and 
(d) subsection (4)(b) were omitted. 
    (5) In this section references to the expiration of the prisoner's sentence shall be construed in accordance with subsection (3) of section 50 of the 1983 Act (prisoners under sentence). 
  

Fine defaulters and contemnors. 

    23. This Chapter (except sections 16 to 18 above) applies to persons committed to prison or to be detained under section 9 of the 1982 Act- 
  

(a) in default of payment of a sum adjudged to be paid by a conviction; or 
(b) for contempt of court or any kindred offence, 
as it applies to persons serving equivalent sentences of imprisonment; and references in this Chapter to prisoners, or to prison or imprisonment, shall be construed accordingly. 
  

Persons liable to removal from the United Kingdom. 

    24. - (1) In relation to an offender who is liable to removal from the United Kingdom- 
  

(a) section 12 above shall have effect as if, in subsection (2), for the words "shall, if recommended to do so by the Parole Board," there were substituted the word "may"; and 
(b) section 16 above shall have effect as if, in subsection (2), for the words "On his release, the offender shall" there were substituted the words "If the Secretary of State thinks fit, the offender shall, on his release,". 
    (2) An offender is liable to removal from the United Kingdom for the purposes of this section if- 
  

(a) he is liable to deportation under section 3(5) of the Immigration Act 1971 and has been notified of a decision to make a deportation order against him; 
(b) he is liable to deportation under section 3(6) of that Act; 
(c) he has been notified of a decision to refuse him leave to enter the United Kingdom; or 
(d) he is an illegal entrant within the meaning of section 33(1) of that Act. 
Persons extradited to the United Kingdom. 

    25. - (1) A prisoner is an extradited prisoner for the purposes of this section if- 
  

(a) he was tried for the offence in respect of which his sentence was imposed- 
(i) after having been extradited to the United Kingdom; and 
(ii) without having first been restored or had an opportunity of leaving the United Kingdom; and 
(b) he was kept in custody while awaiting his extradition to the United Kingdom as mentioned in paragraph (a) above. 
    (2) If, in the case of an extradited prisoner, the court by which he was sentenced so ordered, this Chapter shall have effect in relation to him as if a number of days specified in the order were a number of days in relation to which a direction under section 9 above had been given. 
  

    (3) The number of days that may be so specified is such number as in the opinion of the court is just in all the circumstances and does not exceed the number of days for which he was kept in custody as mentioned in subsection (1)(b) above. 
  

    (4) In this section- 
  

"extradited to the United Kingdom" means returned to the United Kingdom- 
(i) in pursuance of extradition arrangements; 
(ii) under any law of a designated Commonwealth country corresponding to the Extradition Act 1989; 
(iii) under that Act as extended to a colony or under any corresponding law of a colony; 
(iv) in pursuance of a warrant of arrest endorsed in the Republic of Ireland under the law of that country corresponding to the Backing of Warrants (Republic of Ireland) Act 1965; or 
(v) in pursuance of arrangements with a foreign state in respect of which an Order in Council under section 2 of the Extradition Act 1870 is in force; 
"extradition arrangements" has the meaning given by section 3 of the Extradition Act 1989; 
"designated Commonwealth country" has the meaning given by section 5(1) of that Act. 

Supplemental 

Continuity of sentencing. 

    26. - (1) This section has effect for the purpose of securing that, where a person is sentenced to a term of imprisonment in respect of an offence- 
  

(a) to which this section applies; and 
(b) which is committed after the commencement of this Chapter, 
he serves approximately the same time in prison as he would have served if the offence had been committed immediately before that commencement. 
  

    (2) Subject to sections 3(2) and 4(2) above, the court by which a person is so sentenced at any time shall impose a term which is equal to two-thirds of the term which, at that time, it would have considered to be appropriate if the offence had been so committed. 
  

    (3) This section applies to any offence other than one- 
  

(a) which did not subsist, or was not punishable with imprisonment, immediately before the commencement of this Chapter; or 
(b) for which the maximum sentence of imprisonment that may be imposed has been varied after that commencement. 
Interpretation of Chapter I. 

    27. - (1) In this Chapter- 
  

"court", except in sections 9, 17 and 19 above, includes a court-martial and a Standing Civilian Court; 
"prescribed" means prescribed by prison rules; 
"prison rules" means rules made under section 47 of the Prison Act 1952; 
"prisoner" has the meaning given by section 8(2) above; 
"sentence of imprisonment" does not include a committal- 
(a) in default of payment of any sum of money; 
(b) for want of sufficient distress to satisfy any sum of money; or 
(c) for failure to do or abstain from doing anything required to be done or left undone; 
and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly; 
"sexual offence" has the same meaning as in Part I of the 1991 Act. 
    (2) Subject to subsections (3) and (4) below, for the purposes of any reference in this Chapter, however expressed, to the term of imprisonment to which a person has been or could be sentenced, consecutive terms and terms which are wholly or partly concurrent shall be treated as a single term. 
  

    (3) Subsection (4) below applies where- 
  

(a) an offender sentenced to two or more concurrent or consecutive terms of imprisonment is released from prison; and 
(b) a direction was given under section 20(3) or 21(3) above in respect of one or more of those terms. 
    (4) The offender's release supervision period shall be equal to the aggregate of the following, namely- 
  

(a) the period which would be applicable if he had been sentenced only to the term or terms in respect of which such a direction was given; and 
(b) the period which would be applicable if he had not been sentenced to the following, namely- 
(i) the term or terms mentioned in paragraph (a) above; and 
(ii) so much of any other term as was concurrent with, or with any part of, the term or any of the terms so mentioned. 
    (5) Any order, rules or prison rules made under or by virtue of this Chapter may make such incidental, supplemental and consequential provisions as may appear to the Secretary of State to be necessary or expedient. 
  

CHAPTER II 

LIFE SENTENCES 


Release on licence 

Duty to release certain life prisoners. 

    28. - (1) A life prisoner is one to whom this section applies if- 
  

(a) the conditions mentioned in subsection (2) below are fulfilled; or 
(b) he was under 18 at the time when he committed the offence for which his sentence was imposed. 
    (2) The conditions referred to in subsection (1)(a) above are- 
  

(a) that the prisoner's sentence was imposed for an offence the sentence for which is not fixed by law; and 
(b) that the court by which he was sentenced for that offence ordered that this section should apply to him as soon as he had served a part of his sentence specified in the order. 
    (3) A part of a sentence specified in an order under subsection (2)(b) above shall be such part as the court considers appropriate taking into account- 
  

(a) the seriousness of the offence, or the combination of the offence and other offences associated with it; and 
(b) the effect of any direction which it would have given under section 9 above if it had sentenced him to a term of imprisonment. 
    (4) Where in the case of a life prisoner to whom this section applies the conditions mentioned in subsection (2) above are not fulfilled, the Secretary of State shall direct that this section shall apply to him as soon as he has served a part of his sentence specified in the direction. 
  

    (5) As soon as, in the case of a life prisoner to whom this section applies- 
  

(a) he has served the part of his sentence specified in the order or direction ("the relevant part"); and 
(b) the Parole Board has directed his release under this section, 
it shall be the duty of the Secretary of State to release him on licence. 
  

    (6) The Parole Board shall not give a direction under subsection (5) above with respect to a life prisoner to whom this section applies unless- 
  

(a) the Secretary of State has referred the prisoner's case to the Board; and 
(b) the Board is satisfied that it is no longer necessary for the protection of the public that the prisoner should be confined. 
    (7) A life prisoner to whom this section applies may require the Secretary of State to refer his case to the Parole Board at any time- 
  

(a) after he has served the relevant part of his sentence; and 
(b) where there has been a previous reference of his case to the Board, after the end of the period of two years beginning with the disposal of that reference; and 
(c) where he is also serving a sentence of imprisonment or detention for a term, after the time when, but for his life sentence, he would be entitled to be released; 
and in this subsection "previous reference" means a reference under subsection (6) above or section 32(4) below. 
  

    (8) In determining for the purpose of subsection (5) or (7) above whether a life prisoner to whom this section applies has served the relevant part of his sentence, no account shall be taken of any time during which he was unlawfully at large within the meaning of section 49 of the Prison Act 1952. 
  

    (9) An offence is associated with another for the purposes of this section if it is so associated for the purposes of Part I of the 1991 Act. 
  

Power to release other life prisoners. 

    29. - (1) If recommended to do so by the Parole Board, the Secretary of State may, after consultation with the Lord Chief Justice together with the trial judge if available, release on licence a life prisoner who is not one to whom section 28 above applies. 
  

    (2) The Parole Board shall not make a recommendation under subsection (1) above unless the Secretary of State has referred the particular case, or the class of case to which that case belongs, to the Board for its advice. 
  

Power to release life prisoners on compassionate grounds. 

    30. - (1) The Secretary of State may at any time release a life prisoner on licence if he is satisfied that exceptional circumstances exist which justify the prisoner's release on compassionate grounds. 
  

    (2) Before releasing a life prisoner under subsection (1) above, the Secretary of State shall consult the Parole Board, unless the circumstances are such as to render such consultation impracticable. 
  


Licences and recall 

Duration and conditions of licences. 

    31. - (1) Where a life prisoner is released on licence, the licence shall, unless previously revoked under section 32(1) or (2) below, remain in force until his death. 
  

    (2) A life prisoner subject to a licence shall comply with such conditions (which shall include on his release conditions as to his supervision by a probation officer) as may for the time being be specified in the licence; and the Secretary of State may make rules for regulating the supervision of any description of such persons. 
  

    (3) The Secretary of State shall not include on release, or subsequently insert, a condition in the licence of a life prisoner, or vary or cancel any such condition, except- 
  

(a) in the case of the inclusion of a condition in the licence of a life prisoner to whom section 28 above applies, in accordance with recommendations of the Parole Board; and 
(b) in any other case, after consultation with the Board. 
    (4) For the purposes of subsection (3) above, the Secretary of State shall be treated as having consulted the Parole Board about a proposal to include, insert, vary or cancel a condition in any case if he has consulted the Board about the implementation of proposals of that description generally or in that class of case. 
  

    (5) The power to make rules under this section shall be exercisable by statutory instrument which shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament. 
  

    (6) In relation to a life prisoner who is liable to removal from the United Kingdom (within the meaning given by section 24(2) above), subsection (2) above shall have effect as if the words in parentheses were omitted. 
  

Recall of life prisoners while on licence. 

    32. - (1) If recommended to do so by the Parole Board in the case of a life prisoner who has been released on licence under this Chapter, the Secretary of State may revoke his licence and recall him to prison. 
  

    (2) The Secretary of State may revoke the licence of any life prisoner and recall him to prison without a recommendation by the Parole Board, where it appears to him that it is expedient in the public interest to recall that person before such a recommendation is practicable. 
  

    (3) A life prisoner recalled to prison under subsection (1) or (2) above- 
  

(a) may make representations in writing with respect to his recall; and 
(b) on his return to prison, shall be informed of the reasons for his recall and of his right to make representations. 
    (4) The Secretary of State shall refer to the Parole Board- 
  

(a) the case of a life prisoner recalled under subsection (1) above who makes representations under subsection (3) above; and 
(b) the case of a life prisoner recalled under subsection (2) above. 
    (5) Where on a reference under subsection (4) above the Parole Board- 
  

(a) directs in the case of a life prisoner to whom section 28 above applies; or 
(b) recommends in the case of any other life prisoner, 
his immediate release on licence under this section, the Secretary of State shall give effect to the direction or recommendation. 
  

    (6) On the revocation of the licence of any life prisoner under this section, he shall be liable to be detained in pursuance of his sentence and, if at large, shall be deemed to be unlawfully at large. 
  


Miscellaneous and supplemental 

Life prisoners transferred to England and Wales. 

    33. - (1) This section applies where, in the case of a transferred life prisoner, the Secretary of State, after consultation with the Lord Chief Justice, certifies his opinion that, if- 
  

(a) the prisoner's offence had been committed after the commencement of this Chapter; and 
(b) he had been sentenced for it in England and Wales, 
the court by which he was so sentenced would have ordered that section 28 above should apply to him as soon as he had served a part of his sentence specified in the certificate. 
  

    (2) This section also applies where, in the case of a transferred life prisoner, the Secretary of State certifies his opinion that, if- 
  

(a) the prisoner's offence had been committed after the commencement of this Chapter; and 
(b) he had been sentenced for it in England and Wales, 
the Secretary of State would have directed that section 28 above should apply to him as soon as he had served a part of his sentence specified in the certificate. 
  

    (3) In a case to which this section applies, this Chapter except section 29(1) above shall apply as if- 
  

(a) the transferred life prisoner were a life prisoner to whom section 28 above applies; and 
(b) the relevant part of his sentence within the meaning of section 28 above were the part specified in the certificate. 
    (4) In this section "transferred life prisoner" means a person- 
  

(a) on whom a court in a country or territory outside England and Wales has imposed one or more sentences of imprisonment or detention for an indeterminate period; and 
(b) who has been transferred to England and Wales, in pursuance of- 
(i) an order made by the Secretary of State under paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 to this Act or section 2 of the Colonial Prisoners Removal Act 1884; or 
(ii) a warrant issued by the Secretary of State under the Repatriation of Prisoners Act 1984, 
there to serve his sentence or sentences or the remainder of his sentence or sentences. 
    (5) A person who is required so to serve the whole or part of two or more such sentences shall not be treated as a life prisoner to whom section 28 above applies unless the requirements of subsection (1) or (2) above are satisfied as respects each of those sentences; and subsections (5) and (7) of section 28 above shall not apply in relation to such a person until after he has served the relevant part of each of those sentences. 
  

Interpretation of Chapter II. 

    34. - (1) In this Chapter "life prisoner" means a person serving one or more life sentences; but- 
  

(a) a person serving two or more such sentences shall not be treated as a life prisoner to whom section 28 above applies unless the requirements of section 28(1) above are satisfied as respects each of those sentences; and 
(b) subsections (5) and (7) of that section shall not apply in relation to such a person until after he has served the relevant part of each of those sentences. 
    (2) In this section "life sentence" means any of the following imposed for an offence, whether committed before or after the commencement of this Chapter, namely- 
  

(a) a sentence of imprisonment for life; 
(b) a sentence of detention during Her Majesty's pleasure or for life under section 53 of the 1933 Act; and 
(c) a sentence of custody for life under section 8 of the 1982 Act. 
    (3) In this Chapter "court" includes a court-martial and "trial judge" includes a trial judge advocate; and in subsection (2) above- 
  

(a) the reference to section 53 of the 1933 Act includes a reference to subsections (3) and (4) of section 71A of the Army Act 1955 and the Air Force Act 1955 and section 43A of the Naval Discipline Act 1957; and 
(b) the reference to section 8 of the 1982 Act includes a reference to subsections (1A) and (1B) of those sections. 
PART III 

MISCELLANEOUS AND SUPPLEMENTAL 


Community sentences 

Fine defaulters: general. 

    35. - (1) Subsection (2) below applies in any case where a magistrates' court- 
  

(a) has power under Part III of the 1980 Act to issue a warrant of commitment for default in paying a sum adjudged to be paid by a conviction of a magistrates' court (other than a sum ordered to be paid under section 71 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 or section 2 of the Drug Trafficking Act 1994); or 
(b) would, but for section 1 of the 1982 Act (restrictions on custodial sentences for persons under 21), have power to issue such a warrant for such default. 
    (2) The magistrates' court may- 
  

(a) subject to subsections (4) to (6) and (11) below, make a community service order; or 
(b) subject to subsections (7) to (11) below, make a curfew order, 
in respect of the person in default instead of issuing a warrant of commitment or, as the case may be, proceeding under section 81 of the 1980 Act (enforcement of fines imposed on young offenders). 
  

    (3) Where a magistrates' court has power to make an order under subsection (2)(a) or (b) above, it may, if it thinks it expedient to do so, postpone the making of the order until such time and on such conditions, if any, as it thinks just. 
  

    (4) In this section "community service order" has the same meaning as in the 1973 Act and- 
  

(a) section 14(2) of that Act; and 
(b) so far as applicable, the other provisions of that Act relating to community service orders and the provisions of Part I of the 1991 Act so relating, 
shall have effect in relation to an order under subsection (2)(a) above as they have effect in relation to an order in respect of an offender, but subject to the exceptions in subsection (5) below. 
  

    (5) The following are the exceptions, namely- 
  

(a) the reference in section 14(1A)(a) of the 1973 Act to 40 hours shall be construed as a reference to 20 hours; 
(b) section 14(3) of that Act shall not apply; 
(c) the requirements in the order under subsection (2)(a) above shall, as far as practicable, be such as to avoid any interference with the times, if any, at which the offender normally works or attends school or other educational establishment; 
(d) the power conferred by paragraph 3(1)(d) of Schedule 2 to the 1991 Act shall be construed as a power to revoke the order or deal with the person in respect of whom the order was made for his default in paying the sum in question or do both of those things; and 
(e) paragraph 3(2)(a) of that Schedule shall not apply. 
    (6) In the case of an amount in default which is described in the first column of the following Table, the period of community service specified in an order under subsection (2)(a) above shall not exceed the number of hours set out opposite that amount in the second column of that Table. 
  

TABLE 

f 

Amount  Number of hours  
An amount not exceeding Ł200  40 hours  
An amount exceeding Ł200 but not exceeding Ł500  60 hours  
An amount exceeding Ł500  100 hours  

    (7) In this section "curfew order" has the same meaning as in Part I of the 1991 Act and- 
  

(a) section 12(5) of that Act; and 
(b) so far as applicable, the other provisions of that Part relating to curfew orders, 
shall have effect in relation to an order under subsection (2)(b) above as they have effect in relation to an order in respect of an offender, but subject to the exceptions in subsection (8) below. 
  

    (8) The following are the exceptions, namely- 
  

(a) the power conferred by paragraph 3(1)(d) of Schedule 2 to the 1991 Act to revoke the order and deal with an offender for the offence in respect of which the order was made shall be construed as a power to revoke the order or deal with the person in respect of whom the order was made for his default in paying the sum in question or do both of those things; and 
(b) paragraph 3(2)(a) of that Schedule shall not apply. 
    (9) In the case of an amount in default which is described in the first column of the following Table, the number of days to which an order under subsection (2)(b) above relates shall not exceed the number of days set out opposite that amount in the second column of that Table. 
  

TABLE 

Amount  Number of days  
An amount not exceeding Ł200  20 days  
An amount exceeding Ł200 but not exceeding Ł500  30 days  
An amount exceeding Ł500 but not exceeding Ł1,000  60 days  
An amount exceeding Ł1,000 but not exceeding Ł2,500  90 days  
An amount exceeding Ł2,500  180 days  

    (10) A magistrates' court shall not make an order under subsection (2)(b) above in respect of a person who is under 16. 
  

    (11) A magistrates court shall not make an order under subsection (2)(a) or (b) above unless the court has been notified by the Secretary of State that arrangements for implementing such orders are available in the relevant area and the notice has not been withdrawn. 
  

    (12) In subsection (11) above "the relevant area" means- 
  

(a) in relation to an order under subsection (2)(a) above, the area proposed to be specified in the order; 
(b) in relation to an order under subsection (2)(b) above, the area in which the place proposed to be specified in the order is situated. 
    (13) Where an order has been made under subsection (2)(a) or (b) above for default in paying any sum- 
  

(a) on payment of the whole sum to any person authorised to receive it, the order shall cease to have effect; 
(b) on payment of a part of that sum to any such person, the total number of hours or days to which the order relates shall be reduced proportionately; 
and the total number is so reduced if it is reduced by such number of complete hours or days as bears to the total number the proportion most nearly approximating to, without exceeding, the proportion which the part paid bears to the whole sum. 
  

    (14) The Secretary of State may by order direct that subsection (5)(a), (6) or (9) above shall be amended by substituting for any number of hours or days there specified such number of hours or days as may be specified in the order. 
  

    (15) The power to make an order under this section shall be exercisable by statutory instrument; but no such order shall be made unless a draft of the order has been laid before and approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament. 
  

Fine defaulters under 25. 

    36. - (1) In subsection (1) of section 17 of the 1982 Act (attendance centre orders), after paragraph (b) there shall be inserted the words "or 
  

(c) has power to commit to prison for default in payment of any sum of money a person who is under 25 but is not less than 21 years of age,". 
    (2) In subsection (5) of that section, after the words "under 21" there shall be inserted the words "or, as the case may be, 25". 
  

Persistent petty offenders. 

    37. - (1) This section applies where- 
  

(a) a person is convicted of an offence by a magistrates' court or before the Crown Court; 
(b) the court is satisfied that each of the conditions mentioned in subsection (2) below is fulfilled; and 
(c) if it were not so satisfied, the court would be minded to impose a fine in respect of the offence. 
    (2) The conditions are- 
  

(a) that one or more fines imposed on the offender in respect of one or more previous offences have not been paid; and 
(b) if a fine were imposed in an amount which was commensurate with the seriousness of the offence, the offender would not have sufficient means to pay it. 
    (3) Notwithstanding anything in section 6 of the 1991 Act, the court may- 
  

(a) subject to subsections (4) and (6) below, make a community service order; or 
(b) subject to subsections (5) and (6) below, make a curfew order, 
in respect of the offender instead of imposing a fine. 
  

    (4) Subsections (4) and (5) of section 35 above shall apply for the purposes of this section as they apply for the purposes of that section except that- 
  

(a) the reference in subsection (4) to subsection (2)(a) of that section shall be construed as a reference to subsection (3)(a) of this section; 
(b) paragraph (a) of subsection (5) shall not apply; and 
(c) the reference in paragraph (d) of that subsection to dealing with the person in respect of whom the order was made for his default in paying the sum in question shall be construed as a reference to dealing with the offender for the offence in respect of which the order was made. 
    (5) Subsections (7), (8) and (10) of section 35 above shall apply for the purposes of this section as they apply for the purposes of that section except that the references in subsections (7) and (10) to subsection (2)(b) of that section shall be construed as references to subsection (3)(b) of this section. 
  

    (6) A court shall not make an order under subsection (3)(a) or (b) above unless the court has been notified by the Secretary of State that arrangements for implementing such orders are available in the relevant area and the notice has not been withdrawn. 
  

    (7) In subsection (6) above "the relevant area" means- 
  

(a) in relation to an order under subsection (3)(a) above, the area proposed to be specified in the order; 
(b) in relation to an order under subsection (3)(b) above, the area in which the place proposed to be specified in the order is situated. 
Abolition of certain consent etc. requirements. 

    38. - (1) In subsection (6) of section 12A of the 1969 Act (young offenders), for paragraph (c) there shall be substituted the following paragraph- 
  

"(c) if the supervised person is under the age of sixteen, it has obtained and considered information about his family circumstances and the likely effect of the requirements on those circumstances." 
    (2) The following provisions shall cease to have effect, namely- 
  

(a) in subsection (3) of section 2 of the 1973 Act (probation orders), the words from "and the court" to the end; 
(b) in subsection (2) of section 14 of that Act (community service orders), the words "the offender consents and"; and 
(c) in subsection (5) of section 12 of the 1991 Act (curfew orders), the words from "and the court" to the end. 
    (3) For sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph 5 of Schedule 1A to the 1973 Act (requirements as to treatment for mental condition etc) there shall be substituted the following sub-paragraph- 
  

    "(4) A court shall not by virtue of this paragraph include in a probation order a requirement that the offender shall submit to treatment for his mental condition unless- 
  

(a) it is satisfied that arrangements have been made for the treatment intended to be specified in the order (including arrangements for the reception of the offender where he is to be required to submit to treatment as a resident patient); and 
(b) the offender has expressed his willingness to comply with such a requirement." 
    (4) For sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph 6 of that Schedule (requirements as to treatment for drug or alcohol dependency) there shall be substituted the following sub-paragraph- 
  

    "(4) A court shall not by virtue of this paragraph include in a probation order a requirement that the offender shall submit to treatment for his dependency on drugs or alcohol unless- 
  

(a) it is satisfied that arrangements have been made for the treatment intended to be specified in the order (including arrangements for the reception of the offender where he is to be required to submit to treatment as a resident patient); and 
(b) the offender has expressed his willingness to comply with such a requirement." 

Driving disqualifications 

Offenders. 

    39. - (1) Subject to subsections (2) and (3) below, the court by or before which a person is convicted of an offence may, in addition to or instead of dealing with him in any other way, order him to be disqualified, for such period as it thinks fit, for holding or obtaining a driving licence. 
  

    (2) Where the person is convicted of an offence the sentence for which is fixed by law or falls to be imposed under section 2(2), 3(2), or 4(2) above, subsection (1) above shall have effect as if the words "or instead of" were omitted. 
  

    (3) A court shall not make an order under subsection (1) above unless the court has been notified by the Secretary of State that the power to make such orders is exercisable by the court and the notice has not been withdrawn. 
  

    (4) A court which makes an order under this section disqualifying a person for holding or obtaining a driving licence shall require him to produce any such licence held by him together with its counterpart. 
  

    (5) The following provisions, namely- 
  

(a) section 164(5) of the Road Traffic Act 1988 (power of constables to require production of driving licence etc.); and 
(b) section 27(3) of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 (failure to produce driving licence), 
shall have effect as if the reference to section 44 of the 1973 Act included a reference to this section. 
  

    (6) In this section- 
  

"counterpart", in relation to a driving licence, has the meaning given by section 108(1) of the Road Traffic Act 1988; 
"driving licence" means a licence to drive a motor vehicle granted under Part III of that Act. 
Fine defaulters. 

    40. - (1) This section applies in any case where a magistrates' court- 
  

(a) has power under Part III of the 1980 Act to issue a warrant of commitment for default in paying a sum adjudged to be paid by a conviction of a magistrates' court (other than a sum ordered to be paid under section 71 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 or section 2 of the Drug Trafficking Act 1994); or 
(b) would, but for section 1 of the 1982 Act (restrictions on custodial sentences for persons under 21), have power to issue such a warrant for such default. 
    (2) Subject to subsection (3) below, the magistrates' court may, instead of issuing a warrant of commitment or, as the case may be, proceeding under section 81 of the 1980 Act (enforcement of fines imposed on young offenders), order the person in default to be disqualified, for such period not exceeding twelve months as it thinks fit, for holding or obtaining a driving licence. 
  

    (3) A magistrates court shall not make an order under subsection (2) above unless the court has been notified by the Secretary of State that the power to make such orders is exercisable by the court and the notice has not been withdrawn. 
  

    (4) Where an order has been made under subsection (2) above for default in paying any sum- 
  

(a) on payment of the whole sum to any person authorised to receive it, the order shall cease to have effect; 
(b) on payment of a part of that sum to any such person, the number of weeks or months to which the order relates shall be reduced proportionately; 
and the total number is so reduced if it is reduced by such number of complete weeks or months as bears to the total number the proportion most nearly approximating to, without exceeding, the proportion which the part paid bears to the whole sum. 
  

    (5) The Secretary of State may by order made by statutory instrument vary the period specified in subsection (2) above; but no such order shall be made unless a draft of the order has been laid before and approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament. 
  

    (6) Subsections (4) to (6) of section 39 above shall apply for the purposes of this section as they apply for the purposes of that section. 
  


Transfer and repatriation of prisoners 

Transfer of prisoners within the British Islands. 

    41. ... 

Repatriation of prisoners to the British Islands. 

    42. ... 


Young offenders 

Curfew orders. 

    43. - (1) In subsection (1) of section 12 of the 1991 Act (curfew orders), the words "of or over the age of sixteen years" shall cease to have effect. 
  

    (2) After subsection (2) of that section there shall be inserted the following subsection- 
  

    "(2A) In relation to an offender who is under the age of sixteen years, subsection (2)(a) above shall have effect as if the reference to six months were a reference to three months." 
  

    (3) After subsection (6) of that section there shall be inserted the following subsection- 
  

    "(6A) Before making a curfew order in respect of an offender who is under the age of sixteen years, the court shall obtain and consider information about his family circumstances and the likely effect of such an order on those circumstances." 
  

    (4) In paragraph 3(1) of Schedule 2 to the 1991 Act (enforcement of community orders), for paragraph (c) there shall be substituted the following paragraph- 
  

"(c) where- 
(i) the relevant order is a probation order, or 
(ii) the relevant order is a curfew order and the offender is under the age of sixteen years, 
and the case is one to which section 17 of the 1982 Act applies, it may make an order under that section requiring him to attend at an attendance centre; or". 
Long term detention. 

    44. ... 

Publication of reports. 

    45. - ... 


Mentally disordered offenders 

Power to make hospital and limitation directions. 

    46. ... 

Power to specify hospital units. 

    47. - ... 

Offenders conditionally discharged from hospital. 

    48. - ... 

Other amendments of the 1983 Act. 

    49. - (1) In subsection (5) of section 38 of the 1983 Act (interim hospital orders), for the words "six months" there shall be substituted the words "twelve months". 
  

    (2) In subsection (3) of section 41 of that Act (power of higher courts to restrict discharge from hospital), in paragraph (c)(ii), after the words "section 19 above" there shall be inserted the words "or in pursuance of subsection (3) of that section". 
  

    (3) In subsection (1) of section 47 of that Act (removal to hospital of persons serving sentences of imprisonment etc.), the words "(not being a mental nursing home)" shall cease to have effect. 
  

    (4) In paragraph 5 of Part II of Schedule 1 to that Act (patients subject to hospital and guardianship orders)- 
  

(a) the word "and" immediately following sub-paragraph (a) shall cease to have effect; and 
(b) after sub-paragraph (b) there shall be inserted the words "and 
(c) in subsection (3) after the words "may at any time" there shall be inserted the words ", with the consent of the Secretary of State,"." 

Miscellaneous 

Disclosure of pre-sentence reports. 

    50. - ... 

Committals for sentence. 

    51. After section 38 of the 1980 Act there shall be inserted the following section- 
  

"Committal for sentence on indication of guilty plea to offence triable either way. 

    38A. - (1) This section applies where- 
  

(a) a person who is 18 or over appears or is brought before a magistrates' court ("the court") on an information charging him with an offence triable either way ("the offence"); 
(b) he or his representative indicates that he would plead guilty if the offence were to proceed to trial; and 
(c) proceeding as if section 9(1) above was complied with and he pleaded guilty under it, the court convicts him of the offence. 
    (2) If the court has committed the offender to the Crown Court for trial for one or more related offences, that is to say, one or more offences which, in its opinion, are related to the offence, it may, in accordance with section 56 of the Criminal Justice Act 1967, commit him in custody or on bail to the Crown Court to be dealt with in respect of the offence in accordance with the provisions of section 42 of the Powers of Criminal Courts Act 1973. 
  

    (3) If the power conferred by subsection (2) above is not exercisable but the court is still to inquire, as examining justices, into one or more related offences- 
  

(a) it shall adjourn the proceedings relating to the offence until after the conclusion of its inquiries; and 
(b) if it commits the offender to the Crown Court for trial for one or more related offences, it may then exercise that power. 
    (4) Where the court- 
  

(a) commits the offender to the Crown Court to be dealt with in respect of the offence; and 
(b) does not state that, in its opinion, it also has power so to commit him under section 38(2) above, 
the provisions of section 42 of the Powers of Criminal Courts Act 1973 shall not apply unless he is convicted before the Crown Court of one or more of the related offences. 
  

    (5) Where those provisions of that section do not apply, the Crown Court shall have power to deal with the offender in respect of the offence in any manner in which the court might have dealt with him. 
  

    (6) For the purposes of this section one offence is related to another if, were they both to be prosecuted on indictment, the charges for them could be joined in the same indictment." 
  

Increased penalty for offence of indecency with children. 

    52. ... 


Supplemental 

Financial provisions. 

    53. ... 

General interpretation. 

    54. - ... 

Minor and consequential amendments. 

    55. - ...

Transitional provisions, savings and repeals. 

    56. - ... 

Short title, commencement and extent. 

    57. ... 


