SCHIZOPHRENIA Psychiatry’s For Profit ‘Disease’

CONTENTS
Introduction: In Desperate Need of Help .................................2 Chapter One: Harm Instead of Help .....................5 Chapter Two: Diagnostic Deceit and Betrayal ......................11 Chapter Three: Achieving Real Mental Health .......................17 Recommendations .......................21 Citizens Commission on Human Rights International .........24

®

INTRODUCTION In Desperate Need of Help
ife can sometimes be a real chalThis is not to suggest that anyone taking lenge. It can get very rough indeed. A prescribed, psychotropic drugs should immedifamily faced with a seriously dis- ately dispense with them. Due to their dangerous turbed and irrational member can side effects, no one should stop taking any psychibecome desperate in their attempts to atric drug without the advice and assistance of a resolve the crisis. competent non-psychiatric, medical doctor. To whom can they turn when this happens? We wish to highlight however, that there are According to psychiatrists, one should consult solutions to serious mental disturbances that avoid them as the mental health experts. But that is a the serious risks and flaws inherent in psychiatry. deception, as many have discovered. Any psychiatrist or psychologist who claims Dr. Megan Shields, that “serious metal illa practicing family nesses” are no different “Psychiatrists know nothing physician for more than than a heart condition, 25 years, and an Advisory gangrene of the leg or about the mind, treat the individual Board member of the the common cold, is as no more than an organ in the Citizens Commission on dealing in deception. head (the brain) and have about as Human Rights, warns: As Dr. Thomas much interest in spirituality, “Psychiatrists know Szasz, professor of nothing about the mind, psychiatry emeritus of standard medicine and curing, treat the individual as the State University of as an executioner has in no more than an organ New York, Syracuse, saving lives.” in the head (the brain) states, “If we are to — Dr. Megan Shields, family physician, and have about as much consider mental disease Advisory Board member of CCHR International interest in spirituality, to be like physical disease, we ought to have standard medicine and biochemical or pathological evidence.” And if an curing, as an executioner has in saving lives.” In the film, A Beautiful Mind, Nobel Prize win- “illness” is to be “scientifically meaningful, it must ner John Nash is depicted as relying on psychiatry’s somehow be capable of being approached, measured latest breakthrough drugs to prevent a relapse of his or tested in a scientific fashion, as through a blood “schizophrenia.” This is Hollywood fiction, however, test or an electroencephalograph [recording of brain as Nash himself disputes the film’s portrayal of him electrical activity]. If it cannot be so measured — as is taking “newer medications.” At the time of his Nobel the case [with] … ‘mental illness’ — then the phrase Prize award, Nash had not taken any psychiatric ‘illness’ is at best a metaphor and at worst a myth, drugs for 24 years and had recovered naturally from and that therefore ‘treating’ these ‘illnesses’ is an equally … unscientific enterprise.”1 his disturbed state.

L

INTRODUCTION In Desperate Need of Help
2

therefore ‘treating’ these ‘illnesses’ is an equally … unscientific enterprise.”1 In practice, there is abundant evidence that real physical illness, with real pathology, can seriously affect an individual’s mental state and behavior. Psychiatry completely ignores this weight of scientific evidence, preferring to assign all blame to illnesses and supposed “chemical imbalances” in the brain that have never been proven to exist, and limits all practice to brutal treatments that have done nothing but permanently damage the brain and the individual. Knowing nothing about the mind, the brain, or about the underlying causes of serious mental disturbance, psychiatry still sears the brain with electroshock, tears it with psychosurgery and deadens it with dangerous drugs. Completely ignorant of what they are dealing with, they simply prefer the expedient approach of “throwing a hand grenade into a switchboard to fix it.” It sounds and looks impressive, but in the process destroys a whole lot that’s good, cures nothing but costs billions of taxpayers’ dollars each year. By destroying parts of the brain, the person is more tractable, but less alive. The original mental disturbance remains in place, just suppressed. This is psychiatry in action in the treatment of disturbed individuals. The information in this publication is a warning for anyone who may be experiencing serious difficulties in life, or knows of someone who is, and who is looking for answers. There are alternatives to psychiatric treatment.

Seek out and support them for they can repair and build. They also work. Avoid psychiatry because it only tears apart and destroys. And it never works. Sincerely,

Jan Eastgate President, Citizens Commission on Human Rights International

INTRODUCTION In Desperate Need of Help
3

IMPORTANT FACTS

1 2
5

“Schizophrenia” has no physical abnormality and, therefore, is not a disease. The first patients to be diagnosed with schizophrenia were later found to have been suffering from a virus that caused inflammation of the brain resulting in bizarre behavior. Neuroleptic (nerve seizing) drugs, used to treat schizophrenia, cause damage to the body’s nervous system and result in permanent impairment and even death. Treatment studies show much higher success rates in poorer countries (where neuroleptics were used on fewer patients) than in prosperous countries. Studies show that extreme violence is a documented side effect of both taking psychiatric drugs and withdrawal from them.

3 4

CHAPTER ONE Harm Instead
of Help
ost people consider that psychi- difficulty swallowing, were chronically constipated, atry’s main function is to treat and were unable to complete willed physical acts.”3 patients with severe, even lifePsychiatry never revisited Kraepelin’s material threatening mental conditions. to see that schizophrenia was simply an undiagnosed The most pronounced is that and untreated physical problem. “Schizophrenia was condition first called dementia praecox by German a concept too vital to the profession’s claim of medical psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin in the late 1800s, and legitimacy. … The physical symptoms of the disease labeled “schizophrenia” by Swiss psychiatrist Eugen were quietly dropped. … What remained, as the foremost distinguishing features, were the mental sympBleuler in 1908. Psychiatrist E. Fuller Torrey reported that toms: hallucinations, delusions, and bizarre thoughts,” Kraepelin “put the says Whitaker. final medical seal on Psychiatrists remain “Diagnosing someone as schizophrenic irrational behavior by committed to calling may appear scientific on the surface, naming it and categoriz“schizophrenia” a menespecially when biopsychiatry keeps claiming tal disease despite, after ing it. Irrational behavior could now hold its a century of research, that a genetic brain disease is involved. But head up in medical comthe complete absence of when you step back and observe from a pany for it had names. … distance ... you wonder how they can justify objective proof that it His classificatory system exists as a physical brain their work. … This is not science.” abnormality. continues to dominate — Ty C. Colbert, Ph.D., psychiatry up to the Blaming Our Genes present, not because it Drug Control has proven of value … The neuroleptics [but] because it has been the ticket of admission for (nerve-seizing drugs), also known as antipsychotics, irrational behavior into medicine.”2 prescribed for so-called “schizophrenia” were first However, Robert Whitaker, author of Mad developed by the French to numb the nervous system in America, says the patients that Kraepelin during surgery. Psychiatrists learned very early on diagnosed with dementia praecox were actu- that neuroleptics cause Parkinsonism and symptoms ally suffering from a virus, encephalitis lethar- of encephalitis lethargica, the very problem Kraepelin gica (brain inflammation causing lethargy) had misidentified and called dementia praecox.4 which was unknown to doctors at the time: The drugs damage the extrapyramidal sys“These patients walked oddly and suffered tem (EPS) — the extensive complex network from facial tics, muscle spasms, and sud- of nerve fibers that moderates motor control — den bouts of sleepiness. Their pupils reacted resulting in muscle rigidity, spasms and various sluggishly to light. They also drooled, had involuntary movements.5

M

CHAPTER ONE Harm Instead of Help
5

MARKETING HARM FOR A PROFIT: 1950s – 1970s: Negative psychiatric drug publicity was countered with articles and advertisements in medical journals which routinely exaggerated the benefits of antipsychotic drugs, while blatantly ignoring their numerous risks.

The drug-induced side effect tardive dyskinesia (tardive, meaning “late” and dyskinesia meaning, “abnormal movement of muscles”), is a permanent impairment of the power of voluntary movement of the lips, tongue, jaw, fingers, toes and other body parts and has appeared in 5% of patients within one year of neuroleptic treatment.6 Researchers and psychiatrists also knew the risk of “neuroleptic malignant syndrome,” a potentially fatal toxic reaction where patients break into fevers and become confused, agitated and extremely rigid. An estimated 100,000 Americans have died from it.7 To counter negative publicity, articles placed in medical journals regularly exaggerated the benefits of the new drugs and obscured their risks. Whitaker

says that in the 1950s, what physicians and the general public learned about new drugs was tailored: “This molding of opinion, of course, played a critical role in the recasting of neuroleptics as safe, antischizophrenic drugs for the mentally ill.”8 However, independent research outcomes were worrisome. In a study over eight years, the World Health Organization found that patients in three economically disadvantaged countries — India, Nigeria and Colombia — “were doing dramatically better than patients in the United States and four other developed countries.” Indeed, after five years, “64% of the patients in the poor countries were asymptomatic and functioning well.” In contrast, only 18% of the patients in the prosperous countries were doing well.9 Western psychiatrists responded by arguing that people in poorer countries simply didn’t have schizophrenia at all. However, a second follow-up study using the same diagnostic criteria reached the same conclusion.10 Whereas only 16% of the patients were maintained on neuroleptics in the poor countries, in prosperous countries, the figure was 61%. Neuroleptics were clearly implicated in the significantly inferior Western result. Western experience also showed that relapse rates were lower for non-drugged patients than drugged patients.11 Not until 1985 did the American Psychiatric Association issue a warning letter to its members, and then only after several highly publicized lawsuits that “found psychiatrists and their institutions negligent for failing to warn patients of the drugrelated risk, with damages in one case topping $3 million (€2.4 million).” The reason for this silence had nothing to do with the practice of medicine. The initial investment in chlorpromazine (a neuroleptic) in 1954

“In the 1800’s German psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin (left) put the final medical seal on irrational behavior by naming it and categorizing it. … His classificatory system continues to dominate psychiatry up to the present … because it has been the ticket of admission for irrational behavior into medicine,” psychiatrist E. Fuller Torrey observed.

CHAPTER ONE Harm Instead of Help
6

was $350,000 (€285,598). By 1970 it was generating revenues of $116 million (€95.6 million) a year. Increasing public awareness that neuroleptics “frequently caused irreversible brain damage threatened to derail this whole gravy train,” Whitaker says. In response, new “atypical” (not usual; having less effect on the EPS system) drugs for schizophrenia were introduced in the 1990s, promising fewer side effects. However, the atypicals actually have even more severe effects: blindness, fatal blood clots, heart arrhythmia (irregularity), heat stroke, swollen and leaking breasts, impotence and sexual dysfunction, blood disorders, painful skin rashes, seizures, birth defects and extreme inner-anxiety and restlessness. One of the atypicals had been tested in the 1960s and found to cause seizures, dense sedation, marked drooling, constipation, urinary incontinence, weight gain, respiratory arrest, heart attack and rare sudden death. When introduced into Europe in the 1970s, the drug was withdrawn because it caused agranulocytosis (a potentially fatal depletion of white blood cells) in up to 2% of patients.12 On May 20, 2003, The New York Times reported that the atypicals may cause diabetes, “in some cases leading to death.” Dr. Joseph Deveaugh-Geiss, a consulting professor of psychiatry at Duke University, said that the diabetes link “is looking a lot like what we saw 25 years ago with [tardive dyskinesia].”13 A study of atypical use in 17 Veteran Affairs hospitals found that one antipsychotic drug cost $3,000 to $9,000 (€2,448 to €7,343) more than the earlier drugs per patient, with no benefit to symptoms, easing of Parkinson’s-like side effects or improvement in overall quality of life.14 The British Medical Control Agency and the Japanese Health Welfare Ministry warn about diabetes risks amongst Zyprexa patients. Eli Lilly, the manufacturer of Zyprexa paid out more than $1 billion to settle claims by 28,500 Zyprexa victims because of the life-threatening risk of diabetes.15 Today, psychiatry clings tenaciously to antipsychotics as the treatment for “schizophrenia,” despite their proven risks and studies which show that when patients stop taking the atypicals, they improve.16

Treating ‘Schizophrenia’: A Comparison Between Countries
Several World Health Organization studies have shown that the “schizophrenia” improvement is much greater in poorer countries who employ much less psychotropic drugs in treatment, as opposed to affluent nations who rely majorly on drugs.
61%

“Schizophrenic” improvement rates are HIGHER in poorer countries where LESS DRUGS are used in treatment

64%

18%

16%

Drugs used Rate of in 61 percent improvement of treatments in treatment

Rate of Drugs used in 16 percent improvement of treatments in treatment

In U.S. and three affluent countries
$14,000

In poor countries
$16.2 billion

Antipsychotic Drug Sales
(in millions of U.S. dollars)

$12,000

$10,000

$8,000

$6,000

$4,000

$2,000

1990

1995

2000

2005

The “schizophrenic” drug market in 1999 was worth a lucrative $5 billion (€ 4 billion), and by 2005 it had reached $16.2 billion (€ 13.1 billion). This lower graph above represents U.S., United Kingdom, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and Spain combined — converted to U.S. dollars.

CREATING HARM
Drug-Induced Violence
“Little could the public have suspected that the madman of its nightmares, who kills without warning and for no apparent reason, was not always driven by an evil within but rather by a popular medication.”17
— Robert Whitaker, Author, Mad in America: Bad Science, Bad Medicine, and The Enduring Mistreatment of the Mentally Ill

sychiatrists blame violent crime on a patient’s failure to continue his or her medication, while knowing that extreme violence is a documented side effect of both taking psychiatric drugs and withdrawal from them. z On June 20, 2001, Texas mother and housewife, Andrea Yates, filled the bathtub and drowned her five children, ages 6 months to 7 years. For many years, Mrs. Yates, 37, had struggled through hospitalizations, prescribed psychiatric drugs and suicide attempts. On March 12, 2002, the jury rejected her insanity defense and found her guilty of capital murder. Presidential Assassin: On For the legal profession March 30, 1981, John Hinckley Jr., and the media, the story shown in custody at Quantico, Virginia, had been told and the case staged an assassination attempt on was closed. For psychiatry, President Ronald Reagan. A psychiatrist their excuses were predictlater attributed Hinckley’s attack on the able: Mrs. Yates suffered President and others to be a violent rage from a severe mental illprecipitated by a psychiatric drug. ness, which was “treatment resistant” or she was “denied appropriate and quality mental health care.” Unsatisfied, CCHR Texas obtained independent medical assessments of Mrs. Yates’ medical records. Science consultant Edward G. Ezrailson, Ph.D., studied them and reported that the cocktail of drugs prescribed to Mrs. Yates caused involuntary intoxication. The “overdose” of one antidepressant and “sudden high doses” of another, “worsened her behavior,” he said. This “led to murder.”18 z Robert Whitaker’s extensive research discovered that antipsychotic drugs temporarily dim psychosis but, over the long run, make patients more biologically prone to it. A second paradoxical effect, one that emerged with the more potent neuroleptics, is a side effect called akathisia (a, without; kathisia, sitting; an inability to keep still). This side effect has been linked to assaultive, violent behavior.19

P

z A 1990 study determined that 50% of all condition that had not been previously experienced fights in a psychiatric ward could be tied to akathisia. Patients by the patient.23 20 described “violent urges to assault anyone near.” z Dr. John Zajecka reported in the Journal of Clinical z A 1998 British report revealed that at least 5% of Psychiatry that the agitation and irritability experienced by Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor (SSRI) antidepressant patients withdrawing from one SSRI can cause “aggrespatients suffered “commonly recognized” side effects that siveness and suicidal impulsivity.”24 include agitation, anxiety z In Lancet, the British and nervousness. Around medical journal, Dr. Miki In 1995, nine Australian 5% of the reported side Bloch reported that patients psychiatrists reported that patients effects include aggression, became suicidal and homihad slashed themselves or become cidal after stopping an antihallucinations, malaise and depressant, with one man depersonalization.21 preoccupied with violence while taking z In 1995, nine Australian having thoughts of harmSSRI antidepressants. “I didn’t want to psychiatrists reported that ing “his own children.”25 die, I just felt like tearing my flesh patients had slashed themz On May 25, 2001, to pieces,” one patient selves or become preoccuJudge Barry O’Keefe of the told psychiatrists. pied with violence while takNew South Wales Supreme Court, Australia, blamed an ing SSRIs. “I didn’t want to antidepressant for turning a peaceful, law-abiding man, die, I just felt like tearing my flesh to pieces,” one patient David Hawkins, into a violent killer (of his wife). Had Mr. told the psychiatrists.22 Hawkins not taken the antidepressant, the judge said, “it Withdrawal Effects is overwhelmingly probable that Mrs. Hawkins would not z In 1996, the National Preferred Medicines have been killed.” z In June 2001, a Wyoming jury awarded $8 million Center Inc. in New Zealand, issued a report on (€6.5 million) to the relatives of Donald Schell, who went “Acute drug withdrawal,” saying that withdrawal on a shooting rampage after taking an antidepressant. The from psychoactive drugs can cause 1) rebound jury determined that the drug was 80% responsible for effects that exacerbate previous symptoms of a inducing the killing spree.26 “disease,” and 2) new symptoms unrelated to the
TREATMENT LINKED TO VIOLENCE:

1) David Hawkins: a 74 year old with no prior history of violence, killed his wife while on an antidepressant. A judge ruled that the drug was in part responsible. 2) In 2001, Andrea Yates filled the bathtub and drowned her five young children. Medical experts argue that excessive dosages of certain psychiatric drugs induced the murders. 3) Kip Kinkel, 14, killed two and injured 22 after opening fire at his Oregon high school in 1998. He was also taking psychiatric drugs.
David Hawkins Andrea Yates Kip Kinkel

CHAPTER ONE Harm Instead of Help
9

IMPORTANT FACTS

1

2
3

Psychiatry’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-IV (DSM) currently contains 374 disorders whose subjectivity would cause anyone to be labeled “mentally ill” and drugged. Psychiatrists have been unable to establish agreement on what schizophrenia is, only what to call it. “Schizophrenia,” “bipolar,” and all psychiatric labels have only one purpose: to make psychiatry millions in insurance reimbursement, government funds and profits from drug sales. The cornerstone of psychiatry’s disease model today is the concept that a brain-based, chemical imbalance underlies mental disease. As with all of psychiatry’s disease models, this theory has been thoroughly discredited by researchers.

4

For almost a century, psychiatrists have used the term “schizophrenia” to describe various “irrational” behaviors as “mental diseases” — despite no supporting scientific evidence. Psychiatrists have long disagreed on what constitutes schizophrenia (see excerpt from the 1973 edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders [DSM-II] above) but still employ this lucrative label.

CHAPTER TWO Diagnostic Deceit
and Betrayal

A

s a substitute for mental heal- patients may be relieved to be told that they have ing, the American Psychiatric a ‘physical disease,’ they may adopt a passive Association (APA) developed the role in their own recovery, becoming completely Diagnostic and Statistical Manual dependent on a physical treatment to remedy of Mental Disorders-IV (DSM), a their condition.”27 text that lists 374 supposed mental disorders. Its diagnostic criteria are so vague, subjective and Psychiatrists Cannot expansive that there is possibly not one person Define Schizophrenia alive today who, using this as the standard, Psychiatrists literally vote on what constitutes would escape being labeled mentally ill. Of a mental illness or disorder by raising their hands course, that makes for at a conference. This a whole lot more menexplains why they cantal ill-health business for not scientifically define “There could arguably not psychiatrists. what they treat. In the Meanwhile, psychiDSM-II, they state: be a worse term than mental atrists not only admit “Even if it had tried, the disorder to describe the that they have no idea [APA] Committee could of what causes these not establish agreement conditions classified in DSM-IV.” supposed “diseases,” about what this disorder – Allen J. Frances, professor of they have no scientifiis; it could only agree on psychiatry at Duke University Medical cally validated proof what to call it.”28 Center and Chair of the DSM-IV Task Force whatsoever that they Allen J. Frances, even exist as discrete professor of psychiatry physical illnesses. at Duke University Professor of Psychiatry Emeritus Thomas Medical Center and Chair of the DSM-IV Task Szasz says: “The primary function and goal of the Force, admitted: “There could arguably not be a DSM is to lend credibility to the claim that certain worse term than mental disorder to describe the behaviors, or more correctly, misbehaviors, are conditions classified in DSM-IV.” DSM-IV itself mental disorders and that such disorders are, states that the term “mental disorder” continues therefore, medical diseases. Thus, pathological to appear in the volume “because we have not gambling enjoys the same status as myocardial found an appropriate substitute.” infarction [blood clot in heart artery].” Professor Szasz further states: “Schizophrenia Patients are betrayed when told their emo- is defined so vaguely that, in actuality, it is a term tional problems are genetically or biologically often applied to almost any kind of behavior of based. Elliot Valenstein, Ph.D., says that “while which the speaker disapproves.”

CHAPTER TWO Diagnostic Deceit and Betrayal
11

No x-ray, blood test or brain scan can detect the presence of a so-called mental illness. And the premise that a psychiatric condition is caused by “a biochemical imbalance in the brain” is unsupported by any scientifically validated proof.

Aside from schizophrenia, there are numerous other conditions or behaviors that psychiatrists have defined as diseases and through which they make millions of dollars in insurance reimbursement, government funds and profits from drug sales.

z Craig Newnes, psychological therapies director of a Community and Mental Health Service in Shrop shire, England, related the story of three psychiatrists who told a feisty grandmother that her grandson had bipolar disorder caused by a “brainBipolar Disorder biochemical imbalance.” Quietly, but Psychiatry makes “unproven claims that firmly, she asked what evidence they depression, bipolar had that there was illness, anxiety, alcosomething wrong holism and a host of other disorders are in with his brain. They fact primarily biologic said his mood and and probably genetic behavior indicated in origin. … This kind a serious problem. of faith in science and She asked how they progress is staggering, knew this was caused not to mention naïve by brain chemistry. “First, no biological etiology and perhaps delusionHer grandson was [cause] has been proven for any al,” says psychiatrist quickly transferred to a psychiatric disorder. ... So don’t accept David Kaiser. unit that offered the myth that we can make an z Bipolar Disorder “talking therapies” is supposedly characinstead of drugs. ‘accurate diagnosis.’ … Neither should terized by alternating “Imagine the same you believe that your problems are due episodes of depressituation in oncology: solely to a ‘chemical imbalance.’” sion and mania — thus, you are told that you “two poles” or look like you have can— Edward Drummond, M.D., author of The Complete Guide to Psychiatric Drugs “bipolar.” In January cer, offered no tests, 2002, the eMedicine and told you will have Journal reported: “The two operations, foletiology and pathophysiology (functional changes) lowed by radiotherapy and a course of drugs that of bipolar disorder (BPD) have not been determined, makes your hair fall out. The idea is preposterous. and no objective biological markers exist that corre- … Next time you are told that a psychiatric condispond definitively with the disease state.” Nor have tion is due to a brain-biochemical imbalance, ask if any genes “been definitively identified” for BPD.29 you can see the test results,” said Newnes.

CHAPTER TWO Diagnostic Deceit and Betrayal
12

“Schizophrenia is defined so vaguely that, in actuality, it is a term often applied to almost any kind of behavior of which the speaker disapproves.”
— Dr. Thomas Szasz, professor of psychiatry emeritus Depression
Continuing the fraudulent medical analogy, psychiatrists commonly claim today that depression is also an “illness, just like heart disease or asthma.” The DSM says that five out of nine criteria must be met to diagnose depression, including deep sadness, apathy, fatigue, agitation, sleep disturbances and appetite change. Even psychiatrists are concerned about such attempts to “make an illness out of what looks to be life’s normal ups and downs.”30 Harvard Medical School’s Joseph Glenmullen says, “… [T]he symptoms [of depression] are subjective emotional states, making the diagnosis extremely vague.”31 Dr. Glenmullen says the superficial checklist rating scales used to screen people for depression are “designed to fit hand-in-glove with the effects of drugs, emphasizing the physical symptoms of depression that most respond to antidepressant medication. … While assigning a number to a patient’s depression may look scientific, when one examines the questions asked and the scales used, they are utterly subjective measures based on what the patient reports or a rater’s impressions.”32 David Healy, psychiatrist and director of the North Wales Department of Psychological Medicine reports, “There are increasing concerns among the clinical community that not only do neuroscientific developments not reveal anything about the nature of psychiatric disorders but in fact they distract from clinical research. …”33 Professor Szasz points out: “If schizophrenia, for example, turns out to have a biochemical cause and cure, schizophrenia would no longer be one of the diseases for which a person would be involuntarily committed. In fact, it would then be treated by neurologists, and psychiatrists would then have no more to do with it than they do with Glioblastoma [malignant tumor], Parkinsonism, and other diseases of the brain.”

“No one has anything but the vaguest idea of the chemical effects of [psychotropic] drugs on the living human brain.” — Dr. Joseph Glenmullen, Harvard Medical School

CHAPTER TWO Diagnostic Deceit and Betrayal
13

PSEUDOSCIENCE
Blaming the Brain
“More and more problems have been redefined as ‘disorders’ or ‘illnesses,’ supposedly caused by genetic predispositions and biochemical imbalances. Life events are relegated to mere triggers of an underlying biological time bomb. Feeling very sad has become ‘depressive disorder.’ Worrying too much is ‘anxiety disorder.’ … Making lists of behaviors, applying medical-sounding labels to people who engage in them, then using the presence of those behaviors to prove they have the illness in question is scientifically meaningless.”34
— John Read, senior lecturer in psychology at Auckland University, New Zealand

T

he cornerstone of psychiatry’s disease model today is the concept that a brain-based, chemical imbalance underlies mental disease.35 While popularized by heavy marketing, it is simply wishful psychiatric thinking. As with all of psychiatry’s disease models, it has been thoroughly discredited by researchers. z Dr. Valenstein is unequivocal: “[T]here are no tests available for assessing the chemical status of a living person’s brain.”36 Also, no “biochemical, anatomical, or functional signs have been found that reliably distinguish the brains of mental patients.”37

BOGUS BRAIN THEORY Presented in countless illustrations in popular magazines, psychiatric researchers have dissected, labeled and analyzed the brain while assailing the public with the latest theory of what is wrong with it. What is lacking, as with all psychiatric theory, is scientific validity. As Dr. Elliot Valenstein explained, “[T]here are no tests available for assessing the chemical status of a living person’s brain.”

Elliot Valenstein

CHAPTER TWO Diagnostic Deceit and Betrayal
14

z Dr. Colbert says, newspaper The Mercury “We know that the News warned that brain chemical imbalance scans also cannot determodel for mental mine “mental illness”: “Many doctors warn illness has never been scientifically proven. about using the SPECT (single photon emission We also know that all reasonable evidence computed tomography) points instead to the [brain] imaging as a disabling model of diagnostic tool, saying it psychiatric drug action. is unethical — and potenFurthermore, we also tially dangerous —for know that the research doctors to use SPECT on drug effectiveness/ to identify emotional, Psychiatry makes “unproven efficacy are unreliable behavioral and psychiatric claims that depression, bipolar because drug tests only problems in a patient. illness, anxiety, alcoholism and a measure efficacy based The $2,500 (€2,039) on symptom reduction, evaluation offers no useful host of other disorders are in fact not cure.”38 or accurate information, primarily biologic and probably z Professor Thomas they say.”40 genetic in origin. … This kind of faith Szasz, stated: “There is z Psychiatrist M. in science and progress is staggering, no blood or other bioDouglas Mar makes it logical test to ascertain clear: “There is no sciennot to mention naïve and the presence or absence tific basis for these claims perhaps delusional.” of a mental illness, as [of using brain scans for — David Kaiser, psychiatrist there is for most bodily psychiatric diagnosis]. diseases. If such a test At a minimum, patients were developed (for should be told that SPECT is highly controversial.”41 what, heretofore, had been considered a psychiatric illness), then the z “An accurate diagnosis based on a scan is simply condition would cease to be a mental illness and not possible,” admitted Dr. Michael D. Devous from would be classified, instead, as a symptom of the Nuclear Medicine Center at the University of Texas a bodily disease.” Southwestern Medical Center.42 z In his book, The Complete Guide to Psychiatric z While there has been no shortage of Drugs, Edward Drummond, M.D., Associate biochemical explanations for psychiatric Medical Director at Seacoast Mental Health Center conditions, Joseph Glenmullen is emphatic: in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, stated, “First, no “… [N]ot one has been proven. Quite the biological etiology [cause] has been proven for contrary. In every instance where such an any psychiatric disorder … in spite of decades of imbalance was thought to have been found, it was research. ... So don’t accept the myth that we can later proven false.”43 make an ‘accurate diagnosis.’ … Neither should z According to Valenstein, “The theories are held you believe that your problems are due solely to a on to not only because there is nothing else to take their ‘chemical imbalance.’”39 place, but also because they are useful in promoting z An article published in May 2004 in the U.S. drug treatment.”44

CHAPTER TWO Diagnostic Deceit and Betrayal
15

IMPORTANT FACTS

3 4 5

2

1

Mental health would be the outcome of effective mental healing.

While medical cures exist for physical illness, no psychiatric cures exist for mental disorders.

It is a matter of sound medical fact that undiagnosed physical illness or injury can trigger emotional difficulties.

Several studies show that those diagnosed with “mental illness” were actually suffering from a physical condition.

The true resolution of many mental difficulties begins with a thorough physical examination by a competent medical — not psychiatric — doctor.

CHAPTER Real THREE Achieving
Mental Health

J

ohn Nash makes it clear that he safety, security and respect for people’s willed his own recovery. Why invent needs and rights. a fictitious Hollywood ending to From individuals to governments, far too his life story when the truth — that he many people assume that this is the nature was able to recover from his “demons” of mental healing today. The harsh reality, without drugs — is much more inspiring? however, is that the analogy between physical Psychiatrists promote mental health and mental healing breaks down when contrastas being of equal priority to physical ing the results of physical healing to the results of what passes for mental health. To continue this analogy, just as physical treatment today, health would be the outunder the influence of ”Mental health come of effective physipsychiatry. In simple professionals working within a cal healing, so would terms, while medical mental health system have a mental health have to be cures exist, psychiatric the outcome of effective ones don’t. professional and a legal obligation mental healing. Under the manto recognize the presence of physical Consider the folagement of psychiadisease in their patients … physical lowing basic criteria try today, there is no diseases may cause a patient’s for the creation of mental healing. Logimental health: cally this means that mental disorder [or] may worsen 1. Effective mental psychiatry achieves a mental disorder.” healing technology no improvement in and treatments mental health. — California Department of Mental Health which improve and It is vital to Medical Evaluation Field Manual strengthen individuals know that numerous and thereby society, by compassionate and restoring individuals to personal strength, ability, workable medical programs for severely competence, confidence, stability, responsibility and disturbed individuals exist that do not rely spiritual well-being. on psychiatric treatment. Dr. Loren Mosher’s 2. Highly trained, ethical practitioners who Soteria House project and Dr. Giorgio Antonucci’s are committed primarily to the well-being of their program in Italy (covered later in this publication) patient and patients’ families, and who can and do achieved much greater success than psychiatry’s deliver what they promise. dehumanization and chronic drugging. These 3. Mental healing delivered in a calm alternative programs also came at a much lower atmosphere characterized by tolerance, cost. They and a number of other similar programs

CHAPTER THREE Achieving Real Mental Health
17

still operating are testimony to the existence of both genuine answers and hope for the seriously troubled. It is a matter of sound medical fact that undiagnosed physical illness or injury can trigger emotional difficulties. Dr. William Crook, in his book Detecting Your Hidden Allergies, says those bothered by irritability, depression, hyperactivity, fatigue and anxiety need an immediate full medical physical examination and a complete test for food allergies that could cause precisely those mental changes in a person. z One study concluded that 83% of people referred by clinics and social workers for psychiatric treatment had undiagnosed physical illnesses; in another study, 42% of those diagnosed with “psychoses” were later found to be suffering from a medical illness, and in a further study, 48% of those diagnosed by psychiatrists for mental treatment had an undiagnosed physical condition.45 z Several diseases closely mimic schizophrenia, fooling both patient and doctor. Dr. A. A. Reid lists 21 such conditions, beginning with an increasingly common one, “the temporary psychosis brought on by amphetamine drugs.” Dr. Reid explains that drug-induced psychosis is complete with delusions of persecution and hallucinations, and “is often indistinguishable from an acute or paranoid schizophrenic illness.”46 z “Mrs. J,” diagnosed as schizophrenic after she began hearing voices in her head, had deteriorated to the point where she stopped talking and could not bathe, eat or go to the toilet without help. A thorough physical exam determined she was not properly metabolizing the glucose that the brain needs for energy. Once treated, she dramatically changed. She completely recovered and shows no lingering trace of her former mental state.

In the movie, A Beautiful Mind, about Nobel Prize winner John Nash, the primary reason for his recovery from “schizophrenia” was ignored — his refusal to continue taking psychiatric drugs. Nash (above with his wife at the Nobel ceremony in 1994) hadn’t taken psychiatric drugs in 24 years and recovered naturally.

z Fifty-one year old with schizophrenia Anne Gates, a mother that they suffer of five, was prescribed from too much antidepressants for dopamine or serotonin bipolar disorder after activity and that experiencing recurthe drugs put these rent emotional strugbrain chemicals back gles. She had suicidal into ‘balance.’ That thoughts. However, her whole spiel is a form decelerating menstrual of medical fraud, cycle was never mediand it is impossible cally explored and, as to imagine any other was established with a group of patients — competent physical ill, say, with cancer examination, she really or cardiovascular disease — being deceived suffered from menoin this way.” pause and needed estrogen.47 Hypoglycemia The true resolu(abnormal decrease in tion of many mental blood sugar), allergies, difficulties begins, “[P]lease remember that the caffeine sensitivity, thynot with a checklist of roid problems, vitamin symptoms, but with majority of people suffer from B deficiencies and excesensuring that a compeorganic disease. Clinicians should, tent, non-psychiatric sive copper in the body can also cause maniphysician completes first of all, remember emotional festations of “bipolar a thorough physical stress associated with a chronic disorder.”48 examination. z Dr. Thomas Mental healing illness or a painful condition can Dorman says, “… treatments should [P]lease remember that alter the patient’s temperament.” be gauged on how the majority of people they improve and — Thomas Dorman, M.D. suffer from organic strengthen individuFellow, Royal College of Physicians disease. Clinicians als, their responsibilUnited Kingdom and Canada should, first of ity and their spiritual all, remember well-being — without emotional stress relying upon powerassociated with a chronic illness or a ful and addictive drugs. painful condition can alter the patient’s Treatment that heals should be delivered in a calm atmosphere characterized by tolerance, temperament.”49 In a wish list for mental health reform, Mad in safety, security and respect for people’s rights. America author Robert Whitaker stated, “At the A workable and humane mental health top of this wish list, though, would be a simple system is what the Citizens Commission on plea for honesty. Stop telling those diagnosed Human Rights is working toward.

CHAPTER THREE Achieving Real Mental Health
19

Workable Treatment
Blaming Our Genes late Dr. Loren
Dr. Loren Mosher Dr. Giorgio Antonucci he late Dr. Loren Mosher was a Clinical Dr. Giorgio Antonucci in Italy believes in Professor of Psychiatry at the School of the value of human life and that communication, Medicine, University of California, San Diego. not enforced incarceration and inhumane physical He was also the former Chief of the U.S. National treatments, can heal even the most seriously Institute of Mental Health’s Center for Studies of disturbed mind. Schizophrenia.50 He wrote: In the Institute of Osservanza (Observance) in “I opened Soteria House in 1971. … There, Imola, Italy, Dr. Antonucci treated dozens of soyoung persons diagcalled schizophrenic nosed as having women, most of whom ‘schizophrenia’ lived had been continuously medication-free with strapped to their beds or a nonprofessional kept in straitjackets. All staff trained to listen “usual” psychiatric treatments were abandoned. to understand them and provide support, Dr. Antonucci released safety and validation the women from their of their experience. confinement, spending The idea was that many, many hours each schizophrenia can often day talking with them be overcome with the and “penetrating their help of meaningful deliriums and anguish.” He listened to stories of relationships, rather years of desperation and than with drugs.” institutional suffering. The Soteria project compared their treatHe ensured that ment method with patients were treated “Interestingly, clients treated “usual” psychiatric compassionately, with hospital drug treatrespect, and without at Soteria [House] who received ment interventions the use of drugs. In fact, no neuroleptic medication for persons newly under his guidance, the … or were thought to be destined to ward transformed from diagnosed as having the most violent in the schizophrenia. have the worst outcomes, actually did “The experiment facility to its calmest. the best as compared to hospital and worked better than After a few months, his drug-treated control subjects.” expected. At two years “dangerous” patients — Dr. Loren Mosher, former head of Schizophrenic post-admission, Soteriawere free, walking quietStudies, U.S. National Institute of Mental Health treated subjects were ly in the asylum garden. working at signifiEventually they were cantly higher occupastable and discharged tional levels, were significantly more often living from the hospital after many had been taught how independently or with peers, and had fewer to work and care for themselves for the first time readmissions. Interestingly, clients treated at in their lives. Soteria who received no neuroleptic medication … Dr. Antonucci’s superior results also came or were thought to be destined to have the worst at a much lower cost. Such programs constitute outcomes, actually did the best as compared to permanent testimony to the existence of both hospital and drug-treated control subjects,” genuine answers and hope for the Dr. Mosher said. seriously troubled.

REAL HELP

T

RECOMMENDATIONS Recommendations

1 2

People in desperate circumstances must be provided proper and effective medical care. Medical, not psychiatric, attention, good nutrition, a healthy, safe environment and activity that promotes confidence will do far more than the brutality of psychiatry’s drug treatments. Mental health homes must be established to replace coercive psychiatric institutions. These must have medical diagnostic equipment, which non-psychiatric medical doctors can use to thoroughly examine and test for all underlying physical problems that may be manifesting as disturbed behavior. Government and private funds should be channeled into this rather than abusive psychiatric institutions and programs that have proven not to work. When faced with incidents of psychiatric assault, fraud, illicit drug selling or other abuse, file a complaint with the police. Send CCHR a copy of your complaint. Once criminal complaints have been filed, they should also be filed with the state regulatory agencies, such as state medical and psychologists’ boards. Such agencies can investigate and revoke or suspend a psychiatrist’s or psychologist’s license to practice. You should also seek legal advice to file a civil suit for compensatory damages. Establish rights for patients and their insurance companies to receive refunds for mental health treatment that did not achieve the promised result or improvement, or which resulted in proven harm to the individual, thereby ensuring that responsibility lies with the individual practitioner and psychiatric facility rather than the government or its agencies. The pernicious influence of psychiatry has wreaked havoc throughout society, especially in the prisons, hospitals and educational systems. Citizens groups and responsible government officials should work together to expose and abolish psychiatry’s hidden manipulation of society.

3 4 5

SCHIZOPHRENIA Recommendations
21

he Citizens Commission on Human Rights (CCHR) was established in 1969 by the Church of Scientology to investigate and expose psychiatric violations of human rights, and to clean up the field of mental healing. Today, it has more than 250 chapters in over 34 countries. Its board of advisors, called Commissioners, includes doctors, lawyers, educators, artists, business professionals, and civil and human rights representatives. While it doesn’t provide medical or legal advice, it works closely with and supports medical doctors and medical practice. A key CCHR focus is psychiatry’s fraudulent use of subjective “diagnoses” that lack any scientific or medical merit, but which are used to reap financial benefits in the billions, mostly from the taxpayers or insurance carriers. Based on these false diagnoses, psychiatrists justify and prescribe life-damaging treatments, including mind-altering drugs, which mask a person’s underlying difficulties and prevent his or her recovery.

T

Citizens Commission on Human Rights International
CCHR’s work aligns with the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights, in particular the following precepts, which psychiatrists violate on a daily basis: Article 3: Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of person. Article 5: No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Article 7: All are equal before the law and are entitled without any discrimination to equal protection of the law. Through psychiatrists’ false diagnoses, stigmatizing labels, easy-seizure commitment laws, brutal, depersonalizing “treatments,” thousands of individuals are harmed and denied their inherent human rights. CCHR has inspired and caused many hundreds of reforms by testifying before legislative hearings and conducting public hearings into psychiatric abuse, as well as working with media, law enforcement and public officials the world over.

CITIZENS COMMISSION on Human Rights International
22

MISSION STATEMENT
THE CITIZENS COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS
investigates and exposes psychiatric violations of human rights. It works shoulder-to-shoulder with like-minded groups and individuals who share a common purpose to clean up the field of mental health. We shall continue to do so until psychiatry’s abusive and coercive practices cease and human rights and dignity are returned to all.

Dr. Giorgio Antonucci, M.D., Italy: “Internationally, CCHR is the only group that effectively fights and puts an end to psychiatric abuse.”

Dr. Fred Baughman, Jr., Neurologist: “I think there are a lot of groups today that are concerned about the influence of psychiatry in the community and in the schools, but no other group has been as effective in trying to expose the fraudulent diagnosing and drugging … as has CCHR. They are certainly a highly effective group and a necessary ally of just about anyone who shares these concerns and is trying to remedy these ills.”

Dr. Julian Whitaker, M.D., Director, Whitaker Wellness Institute, California, author of Health & Healing: “CCHR is the only non-profit organization that is focused on the abuses of psychiatrists and the psychiatric profession. The over-drugging, the labeling, the faulty diagnosis, the lack of scientific protocols, all of the things that no one realizes is going on, CCHR has focused on, has brought to the public’s and government’s attention, and has made headway in stopping the kind of steam-rolling effect of the psychiatric profession.”

For further information:
CCHR International 6616 Sunset Blvd. Los Angeles, CA, USA 90028

REFERENCES
References
1. Richard E. Vatz, Lee S. Weinberg, and Thomas S. Szasz, “Why Does Television Grovel at the Altar of Psychiatry?,” The Washington Post, 15 Sept. 1985, pp. D1–2. 2. E. Fuller Torrey, M.D., Death of Psychiatry (Chilton Publications, Pennsylvania, 1974), pp. 10–11. 3. Robert Whitaker, Mad in America: Bad Science, Bad Medicine, and the Enduring Mistreatment of the Mentally Ill (Perseus Publishing, New York, 2002), p. 166. 4. Ibid., p. 203. 5. Ibid., pp. 253–254; Ty C. Colbert, Rape of the Soul, How the Chemical Imbalance Model of Modern Psychiatry has Failed its Patients (Kevco Publishing, California, 2001), p. 106. 6. George Crane, “Tardive Dyskinesia in Patients Treated with Major Neuroleptics: A Review of the Literature,” American Journal of Psychiatry, Vol. 124, Supplement, 1968, pp. 40–47. 7. Op. cit., Robert Whitaker, p. 208. 8. Ibid., p. 150. 9. L. Jeff, “The International Pilot Study of Schizophrenia: Five-Year Follow-Up Findings,” Psychological Medicine, Vol. 22, 1992, pp. 131–145; Assen Jablensky, “Schizophrenia: Manifestations, Incidence and Course in Different Cultures, a World Health Organization TenCountry Study,” Psychological Medicine, Supplement, 1992, pp. 1–95. 10. Op. cit., Robert Whitaker, p. 229. 11. Ibid., p. 182. 12. Ibid., p. 258. 13. Erica Goode, “Leading Drugs for Psychosis Come Under New Scrutiny,” The New York Times, 20 May 2003. 14. Ibid. 15. Zyprexa News articles, Internet address: http://www.azyprexaattorneyforyou.com, 21 Mar. 2004. 16. Op. cit., Erica Goode. 17. Op. cit., Robert Whitaker, p. 189. 18. Edward G. Ezrailson, Ph.D., Report on Review of Andrea Yates’ Medical Records, 29 Mar. 2002. 19. Op. cit., Robert Whitaker, pp. 182, 186. 20. Ibid., p. 188. 21. Charles Medawar, “Antidepressants Hooked on the Happy Drug,” What Doctors Don’t Tell You, Vol. 8, No. 11, Mar. 1998, p. 3. 22. David Grounds, et al., “Antidepressants and Side Effects,” Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, Vol. 29, No. 1, 1995. 23. “Acute Drug Withdrawal,” PreMec Medicines Information Bulletin, Aug. 1996, modified 6 Jan. 1997, Internet address: http://www.premec.org.nz/profile. htm, accessed: 18 Mar. 1999. 24. Joseph Glenmullen, M.D., Prozac Backlash (Simon & Schuster Inc., New York, 2000), p. 78. 25. Ibid., p. 78. 26. Jim Rosack, “SSRIs Called on Carpet Over Violence Claims,” Psychiatric News, Vol. 36, No. 19, 5 Oct. 2001, p. 6. 27. Elliot S. Valenstein, Ph.D., Blaming the Brain (The Free Press, New York, 1998), p. 225. 28. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM II) American Psychiatric Association, Washington, D.C., 1968), p. ix. 29. Stephen Soreff, M.D. and Lynne Alison McInnes, M.D., “Bipolar Affective Disorder,” eMedicine Journal, Vol. 3, No. 1, 7 Jan. 2002. 30. Herb Kutchins and Stuart A. Kirk, Making Us Crazy (Simon & Schuster, Inc., New York, 1997), p. 36. 31. Op. cit., Joseph Glenmullen, p. 205. 32. Ibid., p. 206. 33. David Healy, The Anti-Depressant Era (Harvard University Press, 1999), p. 174. 34. John Read, “Feeling Sad? It Doesn’t Mean You’re Sick,” New Zealand Herald, 23 June 2004. 35. Op. cit., Joseph Glenmullen, p. 195. 36. Op. cit., Elliot S. Valenstein, p. 4. 37. Ibid., p. 125. 38. Op. cit., Ty C. Colbert, p. 97. 39. Edward Drummond, M.D., The Complete Guide to Psychiatric Drugs (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 2000), pp. 15–16. 40. Lisa M. Krieger, “Some Question Value of Brain Scan; Untested Tool Belongs in Lab Only, Experts Say,” The Mercury News, 4 May 2004. 41. Ibid. 42. Ibid. 43. Op. cit., Joseph Glenmullen, p. 196. 44. Op. cit., Elliot S. Valenstein, p. 4. 45. David E. Sternberg, M.D., “Testing for Physical Illness in Psychiatric Patients,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, Vol. 47, No. 1, Jan. 1986, p. 5; Richard C. Hall, M.D., et al., “Physical Illness Presenting as Psychiatric Disease,” Archives of General Psychiatry, Vol. 35, Nov. 1978, pp. 1315–1320; Ivan Fras, M.D., et al., “Comparison of Psychiatric Symptoms in Carcinoma of the Pancreas with Those in Some Other Intra-abdominal Neoplasms,” American Journal of Psychiatry, Vol. 123, No. 12, June 1967, pp. 1553–1562. 46. Patrick Holford and Hyla Cass, M.D., Natural Highs (Penguin Putnam, Inc., New York, 2002), pp. 125–126. 47. Leslie Goldman, “Finding Clues to Unmask Depression,” Chicago Tribune, 22 Aug. 2001. 48. “Alternatives for Bipolar Disorder,” Safe Harbor, International Guide to Alternative Mental Health. Internet address: http://www.alternativementalhealth. com, 2003. 49. Thomas Dorman, “Toxic Psychiatry,” Internet address: http://www.dormanpub.com. 50. Loren Mosher, “Soteria and Other Alternatives to Acute Psychiatric Hospitalization: A Personal and Professional Review,” The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, Vol. 187, 1999, pp. 142–149.

Citizens Commission on Human Rights
RAISING PUBLIC AWARENESS

E

ducation is a vital part of any initiative to reverse social decline. CCHR takes this responsibility very seriously. Through the broad dissemination of CCHR’s Internet site, books, newsletters and other publications, more and more patients, families, professionals, lawmakers and countless others are

becoming educated on the truth about psychiatry, and that something effective can and should be done about it. CCHR’s publications—available in 15 languages— show the harmful impact of psychiatry on racism, education, women, justice, drug rehabilitation, morals, the elderly, religion, and many other areas. A list of these includes:

THE REAL CRISIS—In Mental Health Today Report and recommendations on the lack of science and results within the mental health industry MASSIVE FRAUD—Psychiatry’s Corrupt Industry Report and recommendations on a criminal mental health monopoly PSYCHIATRIC MALPRACTICE—The Subversion of Medicine Report and recommendations on psychiatry’s destructive impact on health care INVENTING DISORDERS—For Drug Profits Report and recommendations on the unscientific fraud perpetrated by psychiatry SCHIZOPHRENIA—Psychiatry’s For Profit ‘Disease’ Report and recommendations on psychiatric lies and false diagnoses BRUTAL THERAPIES—Harmful Psychiatric ‘Treatments’ Report and recommendations on the destructive practices of electroshock and psychosurgery PSYCHIATRIC RAPE—Assaulting Women and Children Report and recommendations on widespread sex crimes against patients within the mental health system DEADLY RESTRAINTS—Psychiatry’s ‘Therapeutic’ Assault Report and recommendations on the violent and dangerous use of restraints in mental health facilities PSYCHIATRY—Hooking Your World on Drugs Report and recommendations on psychiatry creating today’s drug crisis REHAB FRAUD—Psychiatry’s Drug Scam Report and recommendations on methadone and other disastrous psychiatric drug ‘rehabilitation’ programs

CHILD DRUGGING—Psychiatry Destroying Lives Report and recommendations on fraudulent psychiatric diagnoses and the enforced drugging of youth HARMING YOUTH—Screening and Drugs Ruin Young Minds Report and recommendations on harmful mental health assessments, evaluations and programs within our schools COMMUNITY RUIN—Psychiatry’s Coercive ‘Care’ Report and recommendations on the failure of community mental health and other coercive psychiatric programs HARMING ARTISTS—Psychiatry Ruins Creativity Report and recommendations on psychiatry assaulting the arts UNHOLY ASSAULT—Psychiatry versus Religion Report and recommendations on psychiatry’s subversion of religious belief and practice ERODING JUSTICE—Psychiatry’s Corruption of Law Report and recommendations on psychiatry subverting the courts and corrective services ELDERLY ABUSE—Cruel Mental Health Programs Report and recommendations on psychiatry abusing seniors BEHIND TERRORISM—Psychiatry Manipulating Minds Report and recommendations on the role of psychiatry in international terrorism CREATING RACISM—Psychiatry’s Betrayal Report and recommendations on psychiatry causing racial conflict and genocide CITIZENS COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS The International Mental Health Watchdog

WARNING: No one should stop taking any psychiatric drug without the advice and assistance of a competent, non-psychiatric, medical doctor.

®

Published as a public service by the Citizens Commission on Human Rights

CCHR in the United States is a non-profit, tax-exempt 501(c)(3) public benefit corporation recognized by the Internal Revenue Service. PHOTO CREDITS: Page 4: Peter Turnley/Corbis; page 9: NewsPix (NZ); Reuters News Media Inc./Corbis; AP Wide World Photos; page 10: Roger Ressmeyer/Corbis; page 12: Gabe Palmer/Corbis; Lester Lefkowitz/Corbis; page 15: Tom & Dee Ann McCarthy/Corbis.
© 2008 CCHR. All Rights Reserved. CITIZENS COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS, CCHR and the CCHR logo are trademarks and service marks owned by Citizens Commission on Human Rights. Printed in the U.S.A. Item #18905

